You swore to me, when I did give it you,
That you would wear it till your hour of death
And that it should lie with you in your grave:
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
You should have been respective and have kept it.
Gave it a judges clerk! no, Gods my judge,
The clerk will neer wear hair ons face that had it.
He will, an if he live to be a man.
Ay, if a woman live to be a man.
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth,
A kind of boy, a little scrubbed boy,
No higher than thyself; the judges clerk,
A prating boy, that beggd it as a fee:
I could not for my heart deny it him.
You were to blame, I must be plain with you,
To part so slightly with your wifes first gift:
A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger
And so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my love a ring and made him swear
Never to part with it; and here he stands;
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it
Nor pluck it from his finger, for the wealth
That the world masters. Now, in faith, Gratiano,
You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief:
An twere to me, I should be mad at it.
[Aside]  Why, I were best to cut my left hand off
And swear I lost the ring defending it.
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away
Unto the judge that beggd it and indeed
Deserved it too; and then the boy, his clerk,
That took some pains in writing, he beggd mine;
And neither man nor master would take aught
But the two rings.
What ring gave you my lord?
Not that, I hope, which you received of me.
If I could add a lie unto a fault,
I would deny it; but you see my finger
Hath not the ring upon it; it is gone.
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven, I will neer come in your bed
Until I see the ring.
Nor I in yours
Till I again see mine.
Sweet Portia,
If you did know to whom I gave the ring,
If you did know for whom I gave the ring
And would conceive for what I gave the ring
And how unwillingly I left the ring,
When nought would be accepted but the ring,
You would abate the strength of your displeasure.
If you had known the virtue of the ring,
Or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
Or your own honour to contain the ring,
You would not then have parted with the ring.
What man is there so much unreasonable,
If you had pleased to have defended it
With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty
To urge the thing held as a ceremony?
Nerissa teaches me what to believe:
Ill die fort but some woman had the ring.
No, by my honour, madam, by my soul,
No woman had it, but a civil doctor,
Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me
And beggd the ring; the which I did deny him
And sufferd him to go displeased away;
Even he that did uphold the very life
Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady?
I was enforced to send it after him;
I was beset with shame and courtesy;
My honour would not let ingratitude
So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady;
For, by these blessed candles of the night,
Had you been there, I think you would have beggd
The ring of me to give the worthy doctor.
Let not that doctor eer come near my house:
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved,
And that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you;
Ill not deny him any thing I have,
No, not my body nor my husbands bed:
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it:
Lie not a night from home; watch me like Argus:
If you do not, if I be left alone,
Now, by mine honour, which is yet mine own,
Ill have that doctor for my bedfellow.
And I his clerk; therefore be well advised
How you do leave me to mine own protection.
Well, do you so; let not me take him, then;
For if I do, Ill mar the young clerks pen.
I am the unhappy subject of these quarrels.
Sir, grieve not you; you are welcome notwithstanding.
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong;
And, in the hearing of these many friends,
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes,
Wherein I see myself--
Mark you but that!
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself;
In each eye, one: swear by your double self,
And theres an oath of credit.
Nay, but hear me:
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear
I never more will break an oath with thee.
I once did lend my body for his wealth;
Which, but for him that had your husbands ring,
Had quite miscarried: I dare be bound again,
My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord
Will never more break faith advisedly.
Then you shall be his surety. Give him this
And bid him keep it better than the other.
Here, Lord Bassanio; swear to keep this ring.
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor!
I had it of him: pardon me, Bassanio;
For, by this ring, the doctor lay with me.
And pardon me, my gentle Gratiano;
For that same scrubbed boy, the doctors clerk,
In lieu of this last night did lie with me.
Why, this is like the mending of highways
In summer, where the ways are fair enough:
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?
Speak not so grossly. You are all amazed:
Here is a letter; read it at your leisure;
It comes from Padua, from Bellario:
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
Nerissa there her clerk: Lorenzo here
Shall witness I set forth as soon as you
And even but now returnd; I have not yet
Enterd my house. Antonio, you are welcome;
And I have better news in store for you
Than you expect: unseal this letter soon;
There you shall find three of your argosies
Are richly come to harbour suddenly:
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this letter.
I am dumb.
Were you the doctor and I knew you not?
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it,
Unless he live until he be a man.
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bed-fellow:
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.
Sweet lady, you have given me life and living;
For here I read for certain that my ships
Are safely come to road.
How now, Lorenzo!
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you.
Ay, and Ill give them him without a fee.
There do I give to you and Jessica,
From the rich Jew, a special deed of gift,
After his death, of all he dies possessd of.
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way
Of starved people.
It is almost morning,
And yet I am sure you are not satisfied
Of these events at full. Let us go in;
And charge us there upon intergatories,
And we will answer all things faithfully.
Let it be so: the first intergatory
That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is,
Whether till the next night she had rather stay,
Or go to bed now, being two hours to day:
But were the day come, I should wish it dark,
That I were couching with the doctors clerk.
Well, while I live Ill fear no other thing
So sore as keeping safe Nerissas ring.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Windsor. Before PAGEs house.
Enter SHALLOW, SLENDER, and SIR HUGH EVANS
Sir Hugh, persuade me not; I will make a Star-
chamber matter of it: if he were twenty Sir John
Falstaffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow, esquire.
In the county of Gloucester, justice of peace and
Coram.
Ay, cousin Slender, and Custalourum.
Ay, and Rato-lorum too; and a gentleman born,
master parson; who writes himself Armigero, in any
bill, warrant, quittance, or obligation, Armigero.
Ay, that I do; and have done any time these three
hundred years.
All his successors gone before him hath donet; and
all his ancestors that come after him may: they may
give the dozen white luces in their coat.
It is an old coat.
The dozen white louses do become an old coat well;
it agrees well, passant; it is a familiar beast to
man, and signifies love.
The luce is the fresh fish; the salt fish is an old coat.
I may quarter, coz.
You may, by marrying.
It is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Not a whit.
Yes, pyr lady; if he has a quarter of your coat,
there is but three skirts for yourself, in my
simple conjectures: but that is all one. If Sir
John Falstaff have committed disparagements unto
you, I am of the church, and will be glad to do my
benevolence to make atonements and compremises
between you.
The council shall bear it; it is a riot.
It is not meet the council hear a riot; there is no
fear of Got in a riot: the council, look you, shall
desire to hear the fear of Got, and not to hear a
riot; take your vizaments in that.
Ha! o my life, if I were young again, the sword
should end it.
It is petter that friends is the sword, and end it:
and there is also another device in my prain, which
peradventure prings goot discretions with it: there
is Anne Page, which is daughter to Master Thomas
Page, which is pretty virginity.
Mistress Anne Page? She has brown hair, and speaks
small like a woman.
It is that fery person for all the orld, as just as
you will desire; and seven hundred pounds of moneys,
and gold and silver, is her grandsire upon his
deaths-bed--Got deliver to a joyful resurrections!
--give, when she is able to overtake seventeen years
old: it were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles
and prabbles, and desire a marriage between Master
Abraham and Mistress Anne Page.
Did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?
Ay, and her father is make her a petter penny.
I know the young gentlewoman; she has good gifts.
Seven hundred pounds and possibilities is goot gifts.
Well, let us see honest Master Page. Is Falstaff there?
Shall I tell you a lie? I do despise a liar as I do
despise one that is false, or as I despise one that
is not true. The knight, Sir John, is there; and, I
beseech you, be ruled by your well-willers. I will
peat the door for Master Page.
Knocks
What, hoa! Got pless your house here!
[Within]  Whos there?
Enter PAGE
Here is Gots plessing, and your friend, and Justice
Shallow; and here young Master Slender, that
peradventures shall tell you another tale, if
matters grow to your likings.
I am glad to see your worships well.
I thank you for my venison, Master Shallow.
Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good do it
your good heart! I wished your venison better; it
was ill killed. How doth good Mistress Page?--and I
thank you always with my heart, la! with my heart.
Sir, I thank you.
Sir, I thank you; by yea and no, I do.
I am glad to see you, good Master Slender.
How does your fallow greyhound, sir? I heard say he
was outrun on Cotsall.
It could not be judged, sir.
Youll not confess, youll not confess.
That he will not. Tis your fault, tis your fault;
tis a good dog.
A cur, sir.
Sir, hes a good dog, and a fair dog: can there be
more said? he is good and fair. Is Sir John
Falstaff here?
Sir, he is within; and I would I could do a good
office between you.
It is spoke as a Christians ought to speak.
He hath wronged me, Master Page.
Sir, he doth in some sort confess it.
If it be confessed, it is not redressd: is not that
so, Master Page? He hath wronged me; indeed he
hath, at a word, he hath, believe me: Robert
Shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged.
Here comes Sir John.
Enter FALSTAFF, BARDOLPH, NYM, and PISTOL
Now, Master Shallow, youll complain of me to the king?
Knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, and
broke open my lodge.
But not kissed your keepers daughter?
Tut, a pin! this shall be answered.
I will answer it straight; I have done all this.
That is now answered.
The council shall know this.
Twere better for you if it were known in counsel:
youll be laughed at.
Pauca verba, Sir John; goot worts.
Good worts! good cabbage. Slender, I broke your
head: what matter have you against me?
Marry, sir, I have matter in my head against you;
and against your cony-catching rascals, Bardolph,
Nym, and Pistol.
You Banbury cheese!
Ay, it is no matter.
How now, Mephostophilus!
Ay, it is no matter.
Slice, I say! pauca, pauca: slice! thats my humour.
Wheres Simple, my man? Can you tell, cousin?
Peace, I pray you. Now let us understand. There is
three umpires in this matter, as I understand; that
is, Master Page, fidelicet Master Page; and there is
myself, fidelicet myself; and the three party is,
lastly and finally, mine host of the Garter.
We three, to hear it and end it between them.
Fery goot: I will make a prief of it in my note-
book; and we will afterwards ork upon the cause with
as great discreetly as we can.
Pistol!
He hears with ears.
The tevil and his tam! what phrase is this, He
hears with ear? why, it is affectations.
Pistol, did you pick Master Slenders purse?
Ay, by these gloves, did he, or I would I might
never come in mine own great chamber again else, of
seven groats in mill-sixpences, and two Edward
shovel-boards, that cost me two shilling and two
pence apiece of Yead Miller, by these gloves.
Is this true, Pistol?
No; it is false, if it is a pick-purse.
Ha, thou mountain-foreigner! Sir John and Master mine,
I combat challenge of this latten bilbo.
Word of denial in thy labras here!
Word of denial: froth and scum, thou liest!
By these gloves, then, twas he.
Be avised, sir, and pass good humours: I will say
marry trap with you, if you run the nuthooks
humour on me; that is the very note of it.
By this hat, then, he in the red face had it; for
though I cannot remember what I did when you made me
drunk, yet I am not altogether an ass.
What say you, Scarlet and John?
Why, sir, for my part I say the gentleman had drunk
himself out of his five sentences.
It is his five senses: fie, what the ignorance is!
And being fap, sir, was, as they say, cashiered; and
so conclusions passed the careires.
Ay, you spake in Latin then too; but tis no
matter: Ill neer be drunk whilst I live again,
but in honest, civil, godly company, for this trick:
if I be drunk, Ill be drunk with those that have
the fear of God, and not with drunken knaves.
So Got udge me, that is a virtuous mind.
You hear all these matters denied, gentlemen; you hear it.
Enter ANNE PAGE, with wine; MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE, following
Nay, daughter, carry the wine in; well drink within.
Exit ANNE PAGE
O heaven! this is Mistress Anne Page.
How now, Mistress Ford!
Mistress Ford, by my troth, you are very well met:
by your leave, good mistress.
Kisses her
Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome. Come, we have a
hot venison pasty to dinner: come, gentlemen, I hope
we shall drink down all unkindness.
Exeunt all except SHALLOW, SLENDER, and SIR HUGH EVANS
I had rather than forty shillings I had my Book of
Songs and Sonnets here.
Enter SIMPLE
How now, Simple! where have you been? I must wait
on myself, must I? You have not the Book of Riddles
about you, have you?
Book of Riddles! why, did you not lend it to Alice
Shortcake upon All-hallowmas last, a fortnight
afore Michaelmas?
Come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you. A word with
you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as twere, a
tender, a kind of tender, made afar off by Sir Hugh
here. Do you understand me?
Ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so,
I shall do that that is reason.
Nay, but understand me.
So I do, sir.
Give ear to his motions, Master Slender: I will
description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
Nay, I will do as my cousin Shallow says: I pray
you, pardon me; hes a justice of peace in his
country, simple though I stand here.
But that is not the question: the question is
concerning your marriage.
Ay, theres the point, sir.
Marry, is it; the very point of it; to Mistress Anne Page.
Why, if it be so, I will marry her upon any
reasonable demands.
But can you affection the oman? Let us command to
know that of your mouth or of your lips; for divers
philosophers hold that the lips is parcel of the
mouth. Therefore, precisely, can you carry your
good will to the maid?
Cousin Abraham Slender, can you love her?
I hope, sir, I will do as it shall become one that
would do reason.
Nay, Gots lords and his ladies! you must speak
possitable, if you can carry her your desires
towards her.
That you must. Will you, upon good dowry, marry her?
I will do a greater thing than that, upon your
request, cousin, in any reason.
Nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz: what I do
is to pleasure you, coz. Can you love the maid?
I will marry her, sir, at your request: but if there
be no great love in the beginning, yet heaven may
decrease it upon better acquaintance, when we are
married and have more occasion to know one another;
I hope, upon familiarity will grow more contempt:
but if you say, Marry her, I will marry her; that
I am freely dissolved, and dissolutely.
It is a fery discretion answer; save the fall is in
the ort dissolutely: the ort is, according to our
meaning, resolutely: his meaning is good.
Ay, I think my cousin meant well.
Ay, or else I would I might be hanged, la!
Here comes fair Mistress Anne.
Re-enter ANNE PAGE
Would I were young for your sake, Mistress Anne!
The dinner is on the table; my father desires your
worships company.
I will wait on him, fair Mistress Anne.
Ods plessed will! I will not be absence at the grace.
Exeunt SHALLOW and SIR HUGH EVANS
Willt please your worship to come in, sir?
No, I thank you, forsooth, heartily; I am very well.
The dinner attends you, sir.
I am not a-hungry, I thank you, forsooth. Go,
sirrah, for all you are my man, go wait upon my
cousin Shallow.
Exit SIMPLE
A justice of peace sometimes may be beholding to his
friend for a man. I keep but three men and a boy
yet, till my mother be dead: but what though? Yet I
live like a poor gentleman born.
I may not go in without your worship: they will not
sit till you come.
I faith, Ill eat nothing; I thank you as much as
though I did.
I pray you, sir, walk in.
I had rather walk here, I thank you. I bruised
my shin th other day with playing at sword and
dagger with a master of fence; three veneys for a
dish of stewed prunes; and, by my troth, I cannot
abide the smell of hot meat since. Why do your
dogs bark so? be there bears i the town?
I think there are, sir; I heard them talked of.
I love the sport well but I shall as soon quarrel at
it as any man in England. You are afraid, if you see
the bear loose, are you not?
Ay, indeed, sir.
Thats meat and drink to me, now. I have seen
Sackerson loose twenty times, and have taken him by
the chain; but, I warrant you, the women have so
cried and shrieked at it, that it passed: but women,
indeed, cannot abide em; they are very ill-favored
rough things.
Re-enter PAGE
Come, gentle Master Slender, come; we stay for you.
Ill eat nothing, I thank you, sir.
By cock and pie, you shall not choose, sir! come, come.
Nay, pray you, lead the way.
Come on, sir.
Mistress Anne, yourself shall go first.
Not I, sir; pray you, keep on.
Ill rather be unmannerly than troublesome.
You do yourself wrong, indeed, la!
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same.
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS and SIMPLE
Go your ways, and ask of Doctor Caius house which
is the way: and there dwells one Mistress Quickly,
which is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry
nurse, or his cook, or his laundry, his washer, and
his wringer.
Well, sir.
Nay, it is petter yet. Give her this letter; for it
is a oman that altogethers acquaintance with
Mistress Anne Page: and the letter is, to desire
and require her to solicit your masters desires to
Mistress Anne Page. I pray you, be gone: I will
make an end of my dinner; theres pippins and cheese to come.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A room in the Garter Inn.
Enter FALSTAFF, Host, BARDOLPH, NYM, PISTOL, and ROBIN
Mine host of the Garter!
What says my bully-rook? speak scholarly and wisely.
Truly, mine host, I must turn away some of my
followers.
Discard, bully Hercules; cashier: let them wag; trot, trot.
I sit at ten pounds a week.
Thourt an emperor, Caesar, Keisar, and Pheezar. I
will entertain Bardolph; he shall draw, he shall
tap: said I well, bully Hector?
Do so, good mine host.
I have spoke; let him follow.
To BARDOLPH
Let me see thee froth and lime: I am at a word; follow.
Exit
Bardolph, follow him. A tapster is a good trade:
an old cloak makes a new jerkin; a withered
serving-man a fresh tapster. Go; adieu.
It is a life that I have desired: I will thrive.
O base Hungarian wight! wilt thou the spigot wield?
Exit BARDOLPH
He was gotten in drink: is not the humour conceited?
I am glad I am so acquit of this tinderbox: his
thefts were too open; his filching was like an
unskilful singer; he kept not time.
The good humour is to steal at a minutes rest.
Convey, the wise it call. Steal! foh! a fico
for the phrase!
Well, sirs, I am almost out at heels.
Why, then, let kibes ensue.
There is no remedy; I must cony-catch; I must shift.
Young ravens must have food.
Which of you know Ford of this town?
I ken the wight: he is of substance good.
My honest lads, I will tell you what I am about.
Two yards, and more.
No quips now, Pistol! Indeed, I am in the waist two
yards about; but I am now about no waste; I am about
thrift. Briefly, I do mean to make love to Fords
wife: I spy entertainment in her; she discourses,
she carves, she gives the leer of invitation: I
can construe the action of her familiar style; and
the hardest voice of her behavior, to be Englished
rightly, is, I am Sir John Falstaffs.
He hath studied her will, and translated her will,
out of honesty into English.
The anchor is deep: will that humour pass?
Now, the report goes she has all the rule of her
husbands purse: he hath a legion of angels.
As many devils entertain; and To her, boy, say I.
The humour rises; it is good: humour me the angels.
I have writ me here a letter to her: and here
another to Pages wife, who even now gave me good
eyes too, examined my parts with most judicious
oeillades; sometimes the beam of her view gilded my
foot, sometimes my portly belly.
Then did the sun on dunghill shine.
I thank thee for that humour.
O, she did so course oer my exteriors with such a
greedy intention, that the appetite of her eye did
seem to scorch me up like a burning-glass! Heres
another letter to her: she bears the purse too; she
is a region in Guiana, all gold and bounty. I will
be cheater to them both, and they shall be
exchequers to me; they shall be my East and West
Indies, and I will trade to them both. Go bear thou
this letter to Mistress Page; and thou this to
Mistress Ford: we will thrive, lads, we will thrive.
Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side wear steel? then, Lucifer take all!
I will run no base humour: here, take the
humour-letter: I will keep the havior of reputation.
[To ROBIN]  Hold, sirrah, bear you these letters tightly;
Sail like my pinnace to these golden shores.
Rogues, hence, avaunt! vanish like hailstones, go;
Trudge, plod away o the hoof; seek shelter, pack!
Falstaff will learn the humour of the age,
French thrift, you rogues; myself and skirted page.
Exeunt FALSTAFF and ROBIN
Let vultures gripe thy guts! for gourd and fullam holds,
And high and low beguiles the rich and poor:
Tester Ill have in pouch when thou shalt lack,
Base Phrygian Turk!
I have operations which be humours of revenge.
Wilt thou revenge?
By welkin and her star!
With wit or steel?
With both the humours, I:
I will discuss the humour of this love to Page.
And I to Ford shall eke unfold
How Falstaff, varlet vile,
His dove will prove, his gold will hold,
And his soft couch defile.
My humour shall not cool: I will incense Page to
deal with poison; I will possess him with
yellowness, for the revolt of mine is dangerous:
that is my true humour.
Thou art the Mars of malecontents: I second thee; troop on.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. A room in DOCTOR CAIUS house.
Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY, SIMPLE, and RUGBY
What, John Rugby! I pray thee, go to the casement,
and see if you can see my master, Master Doctor
Caius, coming. If he do, i faith, and find any
body in the house, here will be an old abusing of
Gods patience and the kings English.
Ill go watch.
Go; and well have a posset fort soon at night, in
faith, at the latter end of a sea-coal fire.
Exit RUGBY
An honest, willing, kind fellow, as ever servant
shall come in house withal, and, I warrant you, no
tell-tale nor no breed-bate: his worst fault is,
that he is given to prayer; he is something peevish
that way: but nobody but has his fault; but let
that pass. Peter Simple, you say your name is?
Ay, for fault of a better.
And Master Slenders your master?
Ay, forsooth.
Does he not wear a great round beard, like a
glovers paring-knife?
No, forsooth: he hath but a little wee face, with a
little yellow beard, a Cain-coloured beard.
A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
Ay, forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands
as any is between this and his head; he hath fought
with a warrener.
How say you? O, I should remember him: does he not
hold up his head, as it were, and strut in his gait?
Yes, indeed, does he.
Well, heaven send Anne Page no worse fortune! Tell
Master Parson Evans I will do what I can for your
master: Anne is a good girl, and I wish--
Re-enter RUGBY
Out, alas! here comes my master.
We shall all be shent. Run in here, good young man;
go into this closet: he will not stay long.
Shuts SIMPLE in the closet
What, John Rugby! John! what, John, I say!
Go, John, go inquire for my master; I doubt
he be not well, that he comes not home.
Singing
And down, down, adown-a,  and c.
Enter DOCTOR CAIUS
Vat is you sing? I do not like des toys. Pray you,
go and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert, a box,
a green-a box: do intend vat I speak? a green-a box.
Ay, forsooth; Ill fetch it you.
Aside
I am glad he went not in himself: if he had found
the young man, he would have been horn-mad.
Fe, fe, fe, fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. Je
men vais a la cour--la grande affaire.
Is it this, sir?
Oui; mette le au mon pocket: depeche, quickly. Vere
is dat knave Rugby?
What, John Rugby! John!
Here, sir!
You are John Rugby, and you are Jack Rugby. Come,
take-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the court.
Tis ready, sir, here in the porch.
By my trot, I tarry too long. Ods me!
Quai-joublie! dere is some simples in my closet,
dat I vill not for the varld I shall leave behind.
Ay me, hell find the young man here, and be mad!
O diable, diable! vat is in my closet? Villain! larron!
Pulling SIMPLE out
Rugby, my rapier!
Good master, be content.
Wherefore shall I be content-a?
The young man is an honest man.
What shall de honest man do in my closet? dere is
no honest man dat shall come in my closet.
I beseech you, be not so phlegmatic. Hear the truth
of it: he came of an errand to me from Parson Hugh.
Vell.
Ay, forsooth; to desire her to--
Peace, I pray you.
Peace-a your tongue. Speak-a your tale.
To desire this honest gentlewoman, your maid, to
speak a good word to Mistress Anne Page for my
master in the way of marriage.
This is all, indeed, la! but Ill neer put my
finger in the fire, and need not.
Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, baille me some paper.
Tarry you a little-a while.
Writes
[Aside to SIMPLE]  I am glad he is so quiet: if he
had been thoroughly moved, you should have heard him
so loud and so melancholy. But notwithstanding,
man, Ill do you your master what good I can: and
the very yea and the no is, the French doctor, my
master,--I may call him my master, look you, for I
keep his house; and I wash, wring, brew, bake,
scour, dress meat and drink, make the beds and do
all myself,--
[Aside to MISTRESS QUICKLY]  Tis a great charge to
come under one bodys hand.
[Aside to SIMPLE]  Are you avised o that? you
shall find it a great charge: and to be up early
and down late; but notwithstanding,--to tell you in
your ear; I would have no words of it,--my master
himself is in love with Mistress Anne Page: but
notwithstanding that, I know Annes mind,--thats
neither here nor there.
You jacknape, give-a this letter to Sir Hugh; by
gar, it is a shallenge: I will cut his troat in dee
park; and I will teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest
to meddle or make. You may be gone; it is not good
you tarry here. By gar, I will cut all his two
stones; by gar, he shall not have a stone to throw
at his dog:
Exit SIMPLE
Alas, he speaks but for his friend.
It is no matter-a ver dat: do not you tell-a me
dat I shall have Anne Page for myself? By gar, I
vill kill de Jack priest; and I have appointed mine
host of de Jarteer to measure our weapon. By gar, I
will myself have Anne Page.
Sir, the maid loves you, and all shall be well. We
must give folks leave to prate: what, the good-jer!
Rugby, come to the court with me. By gar, if I have
not Anne Page, I shall turn your head out of my
door. Follow my heels, Rugby.
Exeunt DOCTOR CAIUS and RUGBY
You shall have An fools-head of your own. No, I
know Annes mind for that: never a woman in Windsor
knows more of Annes mind than I do; nor can do more
than I do with her, I thank heaven.
[Within]  Whos within there? ho!
Whos there, I trow! Come near the house, I pray you.
Enter FENTON
How now, good woman? how dost thou?
The better that it pleases your good worship to ask.
What news? how does pretty Mistress Anne?
In truth, sir, and she is pretty, and honest, and
gentle; and one that is your friend, I can tell you
that by the way; I praise heaven for it.
Shall I do any good, thinkest thou? shall I not lose my suit?
Troth, sir, all is in his hands above: but
notwithstanding, Master Fenton, Ill be sworn on a
book, she loves you. Have not your worship a wart
above your eye?
Yes, marry, have I; what of that?
Well, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such
another Nan; but, I detest, an honest maid as ever
broke bread: we had an hours talk of that wart. I
shall never laugh but in that maids company! But
indeed she is given too much to allicholy and
musing: but for you--well, go to.
Well, I shall see her to-day. Hold, theres money
for thee; let me have thy voice in my behalf: if
thou seest her before me, commend me.
Will I? ifaith, that we will; and I will tell your
worship more of the wart the next time we have
confidence; and of other wooers.
Well, farewell; I am in great haste now.
Farewell to your worship.
Exit FENTON
Truly, an honest gentleman: but Anne loves him not;
for I know Annes mind as well as another does. Out
upont! what have I forgot?
Exit
ACT II
SCENE I. Before PAGES house.
Enter MISTRESS PAGE, with a letter
What, have I scaped love-letters in the holiday-
time of my beauty, and am I now a subject for them?
Let me see.
Reads
Ask me no reason why I love you; for though
Love use Reason for his physician, he admits him
not for his counsellor. You are not young, no more
am I; go to then, theres sympathy: you are merry,
so am I; ha, ha! then theres more sympathy: you
love sack, and so do I; would you desire better
sympathy? Let it suffice thee, Mistress Page,--at
the least, if the love of soldier can suffice,--
that I love thee. I will not say, pity me; tis
not a soldier-like phrase: but I say, love me. By me,
Thine own true knight,
By day or night,
Or any kind of light,
With all his might
For thee to fight,    JOHN FALSTAFF
What a Herod of Jewry is this! O wicked
world! One that is well-nigh worn to pieces with
age to show himself a young gallant! What an
unweighed behavior hath this Flemish drunkard
picked--with the devils name!--out of my
conversation, that he dares in this manner assay me?
Why, he hath not been thrice in my company! What
should I say to him? I was then frugal of my
mirth: Heaven forgive me! Why, Ill exhibit a bill
in the parliament for the putting down of men. How
shall I be revenged on him? for revenged I will be,
as sure as his guts are made of puddings.
Enter MISTRESS FORD
Mistress Page! trust me, I was going to your house.
And, trust me, I was coming to you. You look very
ill.
Nay, Ill neer believe that; I have to show to the contrary.
Faith, but you do, in my mind.
Well, I do then; yet I say I could show you to the
contrary. O Mistress Page, give me some counsel!
Whats the matter, woman?
O woman, if it were not for one trifling respect, I
could come to such honour!
Hang the trifle, woman! take the honour. What is
it? dispense with trifles; what is it?
If I would but go to hell for an eternal moment or so,
I could be knighted.
What? thou liest! Sir Alice Ford! These knights
will hack; and so thou shouldst not alter the
article of thy gentry.
We burn daylight: here, read, read; perceive how I
might be knighted. I shall think the worse of fat
men, as long as I have an eye to make difference of
mens liking: and yet he would not swear; praised
womens modesty; and gave such orderly and
well-behaved reproof to all uncomeliness, that I
would have sworn his disposition would have gone to
the truth of his words; but they do no more adhere
and keep place together than the Hundredth Psalm to
the tune of Green Sleeves. What tempest, I trow,
threw this whale, with so many tuns of oil in his
belly, ashore at Windsor? How shall I be revenged
on him? I think the best way were to entertain him
with hope, till the wicked fire of lust have melted
him in his own grease. Did you ever hear the like?
Letter for letter, but that the name of Page and
Ford differs! To thy great comfort in this mystery
of ill opinions, heres the twin-brother of thy
letter: but let thine inherit first; for, I
protest, mine never shall. I warrant he hath a
thousand of these letters, writ with blank space for
different names--sure, more,--and these are of the
second edition: he will print them, out of doubt;
for he cares not what he puts into the press, when
he would put us two. I had rather be a giantess,
and lie under Mount Pelion. Well, I will find you
twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste man.
Why, this is the very same; the very hand, the very
words. What doth he think of us?
Nay, I know not: it makes me almost ready to
wrangle with mine own honesty. Ill entertain
myself like one that I am not acquainted withal;
for, sure, unless he know some strain in me, that I
know not myself, he would never have boarded me in this fury.
Boarding, call you it? Ill be sure to keep him
above deck.
So will Iif he come under my hatches, Ill never
to sea again. Lets be revenged on him: lets
appoint him a meeting; give him a show of comfort in
his suit and lead him on with a fine-baited delay,
till he hath pawned his horses to mine host of the Garter.
Nay, I will consent to act any villany against him,
that may not sully the chariness of our honesty. O,
that my husband saw this letter! it would give
eternal food to his jealousy.
Why, look where he comes; and my good man too: hes
as far from jealousy as I am from giving him cause;
and that I hope is an unmeasurable distance.
You are the happier woman.
Lets consult together against this greasy knight.
Come hither.
They retire
Enter FORD with PISTOL, and PAGE with NYM
Well, I hope it be not so.
Hope is a curtal dog in some affairs:
Sir John affects thy wife.
Why, sir, my wife is not young.
He wooes both high and low, both rich and poor,
Both young and old, one with another, Ford;
He loves the gallimaufry: Ford, perpend.
Love my wife!
With liver burning hot. Prevent, or go thou,
Like Sir Actaeon he, with Ringwood at thy heels:
O, odious is the name!
What name, sir?
The horn, I say. Farewell.
Take heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night:
Take heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo-birds do sing.
Away, Sir Corporal Nym!
Believe it, Page; he speaks sense.
Exit
[Aside]  I will be patient; I will find out this.
[To PAGE]  And this is true; I like not the humour
of lying. He hath wronged me in some humours: I
should have borne the humoured letter to her; but I
have a sword and it shall bite upon my necessity.
He loves your wife; theres the short and the long.
My name is Corporal Nym; I speak and I avouch; tis
true: my name is Nym and Falstaff loves your wife.
Adieu. I love not the humour of bread and cheese,
and theres the humour of it. Adieu.
Exit
The humour of it, quoth a! heres a fellow
frights English out of his wits.
I will seek out Falstaff.
I never heard such a drawling, affecting rogue.
If I do find it: well.
I will not believe such a Cataian, though the priest
o the town commended him for a true man.
Twas a good sensible fellow: well.
How now, Meg!
MISTRESS PAGE and MISTRESS FORD come forward
Whither go you, George? Hark you.
How now, sweet Frank! why art thou melancholy?
I melancholy! I am not melancholy. Get you home, go.
Faith, thou hast some crotchets in thy head. Now,
will you go, Mistress Page?
Have with you. Youll come to dinner, George.
Aside to MISTRESS FORD
Look who comes yonder: she shall be our messenger
to this paltry knight.
[Aside to MISTRESS PAGE]  Trust me, I thought on her:
shell fit it.
Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY
You are come to see my daughter Anne?
Ay, forsooth; and, I pray, how does good Mistress Anne?
Go in with us and see: we have an hours talk with
you.
Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and MISTRESS QUICKLY
How now, Master Ford!
You heard what this knave told me, did you not?
Yes: and you heard what the other told me?
Do you think there is truth in them?
Hang em, slaves! I do not think the knight would
offer it: but these that accuse him in his intent
towards our wives are a yoke of his discarded men;
very rogues, now they be out of service.
Were they his men?
Marry, were they.
I like it never the better for that. Does he lie at
the Garter?
Ay, marry, does he. If he should intend this voyage
towards my wife, I would turn her loose to him; and
what he gets more of her than sharp words, let it
lie on my head.
I do not misdoubt my wife; but I would be loath to
turn them together. A man may be too confident: I
would have nothing lie on my head: I cannot be thus satisfied.
Look where my ranting host of the Garter comes:
there is either liquor in his pate or money in his
purse when he looks so merrily.
Enter Host
How now, mine host!
How now, bully-rook! thourt a gentleman.
Cavaleiro-justice, I say!
Enter SHALLOW
I follow, mine host, I follow. Good even and
twenty, good Master Page! Master Page, will you go
with us? we have sport in hand.
Tell him, cavaleiro-justice; tell him, bully-rook.
Sir, there is a fray to be fought between Sir Hugh
the Welsh priest and Caius the French doctor.
Good mine host o the Garter, a word with you.
Drawing him aside
What sayest thou, my bully-rook?
[To PAGE]  Will you go with us to behold it? My
merry host hath had the measuring of their weapons;
and, I think, hath appointed them contrary places;
for, believe me, I hear the parson is no jester.
Hark, I will tell you what our sport shall be.
They converse apart
Hast thou no suit against my knight, my
guest-cavaleire?
None, I protest: but Ill give you a pottle of
burnt sack to give me recourse to him and tell him
my name is Brook; only for a jest.
My hand, bully; thou shalt have egress and regress;
--said I well?--and thy name shall be Brook. It is
a merry knight. Will you go, An-heires?
Have with you, mine host.
I have heard the Frenchman hath good skill in
his rapier.
Tut, sir, I could have told you more. In these times
you stand on distance, your passes, stoccadoes, and
I know not what: tis the heart, Master Page; tis
here, tis here. I have seen the time, with my long
sword I would have made you four tall fellows skip like rats.
Here, boys, here, here! shall we wag?
Have with you. I would rather hear them scold than fight.
Exeunt Host, SHALLOW, and PAGE
Though Page be a secure fool, an stands so firmly
on his wifes frailty, yet I cannot put off my
opinion so easily: she was in his company at Pages
house; and what they made there, I know not. Well,
I will look further intot: and I have a disguise
to sound Falstaff. If I find her honest, I lose not
my labour; if she be otherwise, tis labour well bestowed.
Exit
SCENE II. A room in the Garter Inn.
Enter FALSTAFF and PISTOL
I will not lend thee a penny.
Why, then the worlds mine oyster.
Which I with sword will open.
Not a penny. I have been content, sir, you should
lay my countenance to pawn; I have grated upon my
good friends for three reprieves for you and your
coach-fellow Nym; or else you had looked through
the grate, like a geminy of baboons. I am damned in
hell for swearing to gentlemen my friends, you were
good soldiers and tall fellows; and when Mistress
Bridget lost the handle of her fan, I tookt upon
mine honour thou hadst it not.
Didst not thou share? hadst thou not fifteen pence?
Reason, you rogue, reason: thinkest thou Ill
endanger my soul gratis? At a word, hang no more
about me, I am no gibbet for you. Go. A short knife
and a throng! To your manor of Pickt-hatch! Go.
Youll not bear a letter for me, you rogue! you
stand upon your honour! Why, thou unconfinable
baseness, it is as much as I can do to keep the
terms of my honour precise: I, I, I myself
sometimes, leaving the fear of God on the left hand
and hiding mine honour in my necessity, am fain to
shuffle, to hedge and to lurch; and yet you, rogue,
will ensconce your rags, your cat-a-mountain
looks, your red-lattice phrases, and your
bold-beating oaths, under the shelter of your
honour! You will not do it, you!
I do relent: what would thou more of man?
Enter ROBIN
Sir, heres a woman would speak with you.
Let her approach.
Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY
Give your worship good morrow.
