Good morrow, good wife.
Not so, ant please your worship.
Good maid, then.
Ill be sworn,
As my mother was, the first hour I was born.
I do believe the swearer. What with me?
Shall I vouchsafe your worship a word or two?
Two thousand, fair woman: and Ill vouchsafe thee
the hearing.
There is one Mistress Ford, sir:--I pray, come a
little nearer this ways:--I myself dwell with master
Doctor Caius,--
Well, on: Mistress Ford, you say,--
Your worship says very true: I pray your worship,
come a little nearer this ways.
I warrant thee, nobody hears; mine own people, mine
own people.
Are they so? God bless them and make them his servants!
Well, Mistress Ford; what of her?
Why, sir, shes a good creature. Lord Lord! your
worships a wanton! Well, heaven forgive you and all
of us, I pray!
Mistress Ford; come, Mistress Ford,--
Marry, this is the short and the long of it; you
have brought her into such a canaries as tis
wonderful. The best courtier of them all, when the
court lay at Windsor, could never have brought her
to such a canary. Yet there has been knights, and
lords, and gentlemen, with their coaches, I warrant
you, coach after coach, letter after letter, gift
after gift; smelling so sweetly, all musk, and so
rushling, I warrant you, in silk and gold; and in
such alligant terms; and in such wine and sugar of
the best and the fairest, that would have won any
womans heart; and, I warrant you, they could never
get an eye-wink of her: I had myself twenty angels
given me this morning; but I defy all angels, in
any such sort, as they say, but in the way of
honesty: and, I warrant you, they could never get
her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of
them all: and yet there has been earls, nay, which
is more, pensioners; but, I warrant you, all is one with her.
But what says she to me? be brief, my good
she-Mercury.
Marry, she hath received your letter, for the which
she thanks you a thousand times; and she gives you
to notify that her husband will be absence from his
house between ten and eleven.
Ten and eleven?
Ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see the
picture, she says, that you wot of: Master Ford,
her husband, will be from home. Alas! the sweet
woman leads an ill life with him: hes a very
jealousy man: she leads a very frampold life with
him, good heart.
Ten and eleven. Woman, commend me to her; I will
not fail her.
Why, you say well. But I have another messenger to
your worship. Mistress Page hath her hearty
commendations to you too: and let me tell you in
your ear, shes as fartuous a civil modest wife, and
one, I tell you, that will not miss you morning nor
evening prayer, as any is in Windsor, whoeer be the
other: and she bade me tell your worship that her
husband is seldom from home; but she hopes there
will come a time. I never knew a woman so dote upon
a man: surely I think you have charms, la; yes, in truth.
Not I, I assure thee: setting the attractions of my
good parts aside I have no other charms.
Blessing on your heart fort!
But, I pray thee, tell me this: has Fords wife and
Pages wife acquainted each other how they love me?
That were a jest indeed! they have not so little
grace, I hope: that were a trick indeed! but
Mistress Page would desire you to send her your
little page, of all loves: her husband has a
marvellous infection to the little page; and truly
Master Page is an honest man. Never a wife in
Windsor leads a better life than she does: do what
she will, say what she will, take all, pay all, go
to bed when she list, rise when she list, all is as
she will: and truly she deserves it; for if there
be a kind woman in Windsor, she is one. You must
send her your page; no remedy.
Why, I will.
Nay, but do so, then: and, look you, he may come and
go between you both; and in any case have a
nay-word, that you may know one anothers mind, and
the boy never need to understand any thing; for
tis not good that children should know any
wickedness: old folks, you know, have discretion,
as they say, and know the world.
Fare thee well: commend me to them both: theres
my purse; I am yet thy debtor. Boy, go along with
this woman.
Exeunt MISTRESS QUICKLY and ROBIN
This news distracts me!
This punk is one of Cupids carriers:
Clap on more sails; pursue; up with your fights:
Give fire: she is my prize, or ocean whelm them all!
Exit
Sayest thou so, old Jack? go thy ways; Ill make
more of thy old body than I have done. Will they
yet look after thee? Wilt thou, after the expense
of so much money, be now a gainer? Good body, I
thank thee. Let them say tis grossly done; so it be
fairly done, no matter.
Enter BARDOLPH
Sir John, theres one Master Brook below would fain
speak with you, and be acquainted with you; and hath
sent your worship a mornings draught of sack.
Brook is his name?
Ay, sir.
Call him in.
Exit BARDOLPH
Such Brooks are welcome to me, that oerflow such
liquor. Ah, ha! Mistress Ford and Mistress Page
have I encompassed you? go to; via!
Re-enter BARDOLPH, with FORD disguised
Bless you, sir!
And you, sir! Would you speak with me?
I make bold to press with so little preparation upon
you.
Youre welcome. Whats your will? Give us leave, drawer.
Exit BARDOLPH
Sir, I am a gentleman that have spent much; my name is Brook.
Good Master Brook, I desire more acquaintance of you.
Good Sir John, I sue for yours: not to charge you;
for I must let you understand I think myself in
better plight for a lender than you are: the which
hath something emboldend me to this unseasoned
intrusion; for they say, if money go before, all
ways do lie open.
Money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.
Troth, and I have a bag of money here troubles me:
if you will help to bear it, Sir John, take all, or
half, for easing me of the carriage.
Sir, I know not how I may deserve to be your porter.
I will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.
Speak, good Master Brook: I shall be glad to be
your servant.
Sir, I hear you are a scholar,--I will be brief
with you,--and you have been a man long known to me,
though I had never so good means, as desire, to make
myself acquainted with you. I shall discover a
thing to you, wherein I must very much lay open mine
own imperfection: but, good Sir John, as you have
one eye upon my follies, as you hear them unfolded,
turn another into the register of your own; that I
may pass with a reproof the easier, sith you
yourself know how easy it is to be such an offender.
Very well, sir; proceed.
There is a gentlewoman in this town; her husbands
name is Ford.
Well, sir.
I have long loved her, and, I protest to you,
bestowed much on her; followed her with a doting
observance; engrossed opportunities to meet her;
feed every slight occasion that could but niggardly
give me sight of her; not only bought many presents
to give her, but have given largely to many to know
what she would have given; briefly, I have pursued
her as love hath pursued me; which hath been on the
wing of all occasions. But whatsoever I have
merited, either in my mind or, in my means, meed,
I am sure, I have received none; unless experience
be a jewel that I have purchased at an infinite
rate, and that hath taught me to say this:
Love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues;
Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.
Have you received no promise of satisfaction at her hands?
Never.
Have you importuned her to such a purpose?
Never.
Of what quality was your love, then?
Like a fair house built on another mans ground; so
that I have lost my edifice by mistaking the place
where I erected it.
To what purpose have you unfolded this to me?
When I have told you that, I have told you all.
Some say, that though she appear honest to me, yet in
other places she enlargeth her mirth so far that
there is shrewd construction made of her. Now, Sir
John, here is the heart of my purpose: you are a
gentleman of excellent breeding, admirable
discourse, of great admittance, authentic in your
place and person, generally allowed for your many
war-like, court-like, and learned preparations.
O, sir!
Believe it, for you know it. There is money; spend
it, spend it; spend more; spend all I have; only
give me so much of your time in exchange of it, as
to lay an amiable siege to the honesty of this
Fords wife: use your art of wooing; win her to
consent to you: if any man may, you may as soon as
any.
Would it apply well to the vehemency of your
affection, that I should win what you would enjoy?
Methinks you prescribe to yourself very preposterously.
O, understand my drift. She dwells so securely on
the excellency of her honour, that the folly of my
soul dares not present itself: she is too bright to
be looked against. Now, could I could come to her
with any detection in my hand, my desires had
instance and argument to commend themselves: I
could drive her then from the ward of her purity,
her reputation, her marriage-vow, and a thousand
other her defences, which now are too too strongly
embattled against me. What say you tot, Sir John?
Master Brook, I will first make bold with your
money; next, give me your hand; and last, as I am a
gentleman, you shall, if you will, enjoy Fords wife.
O good sir!
I say you shall.
Want no money, Sir John; you shall want none.
Want no Mistress Ford, Master Brook; you shall want
none. I shall be with her, I may tell you, by her
own appointment; even as you came in to me, her
assistant or go-between parted from me: I say I
shall be with her between ten and eleven; for at
that time the jealous rascally knave her husband
will be forth. Come you to me at night; you shall
know how I speed.
I am blest in your acquaintance. Do you know Ford,
sir?
Hang him, poor cuckoldly knave! I know him not:
yet I wrong him to call him poor; they say the
jealous wittolly knave hath masses of money; for the
which his wife seems to me well-favored. I will
use her as the key of the cuckoldly rogues coffer;
and theres my harvest-home.
I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might avoid him
if you saw him.
Hang him, mechanical salt-butter rogue! I will
stare him out of his wits; I will awe him with my
cudgel: it shall hang like a meteor oer the
cuckolds horns. Master Brook, thou shalt know I
will predominate over the peasant, and thou shalt
lie with his wife. Come to me soon at night.
Fords a knave, and I will aggravate his style;
thou, Master Brook, shalt know him for knave and
cuckold. Come to me soon at night.
Exit
What a damned Epicurean rascal is this! My heart is
ready to crack with impatience. Who says this is
improvident jealousy? my wife hath sent to him; the
hour is fixed; the match is made. Would any man
have thought this? See the hell of having a false
woman! My bed shall be abused, my coffers
ransacked, my reputation gnawn at; and I shall not
only receive this villanous wrong, but stand under
the adoption of abominable terms, and by him that
does me this wrong. Terms! names! Amaimon sounds
well; Lucifer, well; Barbason, well; yet they are
devils additions, the names of fiends: but
Cuckold! Wittol!--Cuckold! the devil himself hath
not such a name. Page is an ass, a secure ass: he
will trust his wife; he will not be jealous. I will
rather trust a Fleming with my butter, Parson Hugh
the Welshman with my cheese, an Irishman with my
aqua-vitae bottle, or a thief to walk my ambling
gelding, than my wife with herself; then she plots,
then she ruminates, then she devises; and what they
think in their hearts they may effect, they will
break their hearts but they will effect. God be
praised for my jealousy! Eleven oclock the hour.
I will prevent this, detect my wife, be revenged on
Falstaff, and laugh at Page. I will about it;
better three hours too soon than a minute too late.
Fie, fie, fie! cuckold! cuckold! cuckold!
Exit
SCENE III. A field near Windsor.
Enter DOCTOR CAIUS and RUGBY
Jack Rugby!
Sir?
Vat is de clock, Jack?
Tis past the hour, sir, that Sir Hugh promised to meet.
By gar, he has save his soul, dat he is no come; he
has pray his Pible well, dat he is no come: by gar,
Jack Rugby, he is dead already, if he be come.
He is wise, sir; he knew your worship would kill
him, if he came.
By gar, de herring is no dead so as I vill kill him.
Take your rapier, Jack; I vill tell you how I vill kill him.
Alas, sir, I cannot fence.
Villany, take your rapier.
Forbear; heres company.
Enter Host, SHALLOW, SLENDER, and PAGE
Bless thee, bully doctor!
Save you, Master Doctor Caius!
Now, good master doctor!
Give you good morrow, sir.
Vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?
To see thee fight, to see thee foin, to see thee
traverse; to see thee here, to see thee there; to
see thee pass thy punto, thy stock, thy reverse, thy
distance, thy montant. Is he dead, my Ethiopian? is
he dead, my Francisco? ha, bully! What says my
AEsculapius? my Galen? my heart of elder? ha! is
he dead, bully stale? is he dead?
By gar, he is de coward Jack priest of de vorld; he
is not show his face.
Thou art a Castalion-King-Urinal. Hector of Greece, my boy!
I pray you, bear vitness that me have stay six or
seven, two, tree hours for him, and he is no come.
He is the wiser man, master doctor: he is a curer of
souls, and you a curer of bodies; if you should
fight, you go against the hair of your professions.
Is it not true, Master Page?
Master Shallow, you have yourself been a great
fighter, though now a man of peace.
Bodykins, Master Page, though I now be old and of
the peace, if I see a sword out, my finger itches to
make one. Though we are justices and doctors and
churchmen, Master Page, we have some salt of our
youth in us; we are the sons of women, Master Page.
Tis true, Master Shallow.
It will be found so, Master Page. Master Doctor
Caius, I am come to fetch you home. I am sworn of
the peace: you have showed yourself a wise
physician, and Sir Hugh hath shown himself a wise
and patient churchman. You must go with me, master doctor.
Pardon, guest-justice. A word, Mounseur Mockwater.
Mock-vater! vat is dat?
Mock-water, in our English tongue, is valour, bully.
By gar, den, I have as mush mock-vater as de
Englishman. Scurvy jack-dog priest! by gar, me
vill cut his ears.
He will clapper-claw thee tightly, bully.
Clapper-de-claw! vat is dat?
That is, he will make thee amends.
By gar, me do look he shall clapper-de-claw me;
for, by gar, me vill have it.
And I will provoke him tot, or let him wag.
Me tank you for dat.
And, moreover, bully,--but first, master guest, and
Master Page, and eke Cavaleiro Slender, go you
through the town to Frogmore.
Aside to them
Sir Hugh is there, is he?
He is there: see what humour he is in; and I will
bring the doctor about by the fields. Will it do well?
We will do it.
Adieu, good master doctor.
Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
By gar, me vill kill de priest; for he speak for a
jack-an-ape to Anne Page.
Let him die: sheathe thy impatience, throw cold
water on thy choler: go about the fields with me
through Frogmore: I will bring thee where Mistress
Anne Page is, at a farm-house a-feasting; and thou
shalt woo her. Cried I aim? said I well?
By gar, me dank you for dat: by gar, I love you;
and I shall procure-a you de good guest, de earl,
de knight, de lords, de gentlemen, my patients.
For the which I will be thy adversary toward Anne
Page. Said I well?
By gar, tis good; vell said.
Let us wag, then.
Come at my heels, Jack Rugby.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. A field near Frogmore.
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS and SIMPLE
I pray you now, good master Slenders serving-man,
and friend Simple by your name, which way have you
looked for Master Caius, that calls himself doctor of physic?
Marry, sir, the pittie-ward, the park-ward, every
way; old Windsor way, and every way but the town
way.
I most fehemently desire you you will also look that
way.
I will, sir.
Exit
Pless my soul, how full of chollors I am, and
trempling of mind! I shall be glad if he have
deceived me. How melancholies I am! I will knog
his urinals about his knaves costard when I have
good opportunities for the ork. Pless my soul!
Sings
To shallow rivers, to whose falls
Melodious birds sings madrigals;
There will we make our peds of roses,
And a thousand fragrant posies.
To shallow--
Mercy on me! I have a great dispositions to cry.
Sings
Melodious birds sing madrigals--
When as I sat in Pabylon--
And a thousand vagram posies.
To shallow  and c.
Re-enter SIMPLE
Yonder he is coming, this way, Sir Hugh.
Hes welcome.
Sings
To shallow rivers, to whose falls-
Heaven prosper the right! What weapons is he?
No weapons, sir. There comes my master, Master
Shallow, and another gentleman, from Frogmore, over
the stile, this way.
Pray you, give me my gown; or else keep it in your arms.
Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
How now, master Parson! Good morrow, good Sir Hugh.
Keep a gamester from the dice, and a good student
from his book, and it is wonderful.
[Aside]  Ah, sweet Anne Page!
Save you, good Sir Hugh!
Pless you from his mercy sake, all of you!
What, the sword and the word! do you study them
both, master parson?
And youthful still! in your doublet and hose this
raw rheumatic day!
There is reasons and causes for it.
We are come to you to do a good office, master parson.
Fery well: what is it?
Yonder is a most reverend gentleman, who, belike
having received wrong by some person, is at most
odds with his own gravity and patience that ever you
saw.
I have lived fourscore years and upward; I never
heard a man of his place, gravity and learning, so
wide of his own respect.
What is he?
I think you know him; Master Doctor Caius, the
renowned French physician.
Gots will, and his passion of my heart! I had as
lief you would tell me of a mess of porridge.
Why?
He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and Galen,
--and he is a knave besides; a cowardly knave as you
would desires to be acquainted withal.
I warrant you, hes the man should fight with him.
[Aside]  O sweet Anne Page!
It appears so by his weapons. Keep them asunder:
here comes Doctor Caius.
Enter Host, DOCTOR CAIUS, and RUGBY
Nay, good master parson, keep in your weapon.
So do you, good master doctor.
Disarm them, and let them question: let them keep
their limbs whole and hack our English.
I pray you, let-a me speak a word with your ear.
Vherefore vill you not meet-a me?
[Aside to DOCTOR CAIUS]  Pray you, use your patience:
in good time.
By gar, you are de coward, de Jack dog, John ape.
[Aside to DOCTOR CAIUS]  Pray you let us not be
laughing-stocks to other mens humours; I desire you
in friendship, and I will one way or other make you amends.
Aloud
I will knog your urinals about your knaves cockscomb
for missing your meetings and appointments.
Diable! Jack Rugby,--mine host de Jarteer,--have I
not stay for him to kill him? have I not, at de place
I did appoint?
As I am a Christians soul now, look you, this is the
place appointed: Ill be judgement by mine host of
the Garter.
Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaul, French and Welsh,
soul-curer and body-curer!
Ay, dat is very good; excellent.
Peace, I say! hear mine host of the Garter. Am I
politic? am I subtle? am I a Machiavel? Shall I
lose my doctor? no; he gives me the potions and the
motions. Shall I lose my parson, my priest, my Sir
Hugh? no; he gives me the proverbs and the
no-verbs. Give me thy hand, terrestrial; so. Give me
thy hand, celestial; so. Boys of art, I have
deceived you both; I have directed you to wrong
places: your hearts are mighty, your skins are
whole, and let burnt sack be the issue. Come, lay
their swords to pawn. Follow me, lads of peace;
follow, follow, follow.
Trust me, a mad host. Follow, gentlemen, follow.
[Aside]  O sweet Anne Page!
Exeunt SHALLOW, SLENDER, PAGE, and Host
Ha, do I perceive dat? have you make-a de sot of
us, ha, ha?
This is well; he has made us his vlouting-stog. I
desire you that we may be friends; and let us knog
our prains together to be revenge on this same
scall, scurvy cogging companion, the host of the Garter.
By gar, with all my heart. He promise to bring me
where is Anne Page; by gar, he deceive me too.
Well, I will smite his noddles. Pray you, follow.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A street.
Enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN
Nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were wont to
be a follower, but now you are a leader. Whether
had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your masters heels?
I had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man
than follow him like a dwarf.
O, you are a flattering boy: now I see youll be a courtier.
Enter FORD
Well met, Mistress Page. Whither go you?
Truly, sir, to see your wife. Is she at home?
Ay; and as idle as she may hang together, for want
of company. I think, if your husbands were dead,
you two would marry.
Be sure of that,--two other husbands.
Where had you this pretty weather-cock?
I cannot tell what the dickens his name is my
husband had him of. What do you call your knights
name, sirrah?
Sir John Falstaff.
Sir John Falstaff!
He, he; I can never hit ons name. There is such a
league between my good man and he! Is your wife at
home indeed?
Indeed she is.
By your leave, sir: I am sick till I see her.
Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN
Has Page any brains? hath he any eyes? hath he any
thinking? Sure, they sleep; he hath no use of them.
Why, this boy will carry a letter twenty mile, as
easy as a cannon will shoot point-blank twelve
score. He pieces out his wifes inclination; he
gives her folly motion and advantage: and now shes
going to my wife, and Falstaffs boy with her. A
man may hear this shower sing in the wind. And
Falstaffs boy with her! Good plots, they are laid;
and our revolted wives share damnation together.
Well; I will take him, then torture my wife, pluck
the borrowed veil of modesty from the so seeming
Mistress Page, divulge Page himself for a secure and
wilful Actaeon; and to these violent proceedings all
my neighbours shall cry aim.
Clock heard
The clock gives me my cue, and my assurance bids me
search: there I shall find Falstaff: I shall be
rather praised for this than mocked; for it is as
positive as the earth is firm that Falstaff is
there: I will go.
Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, SLENDER, Host, SIR HUGH EVANS, DOCTOR CAIUS, and RUGBY
Well met, Master Ford.
Trust me, a good knot: I have good cheer at home;
and I pray you all go with me.
I must excuse myself, Master Ford.
And so must I, sir: we have appointed to dine with
Mistress Anne, and I would not break with her for
more money than Ill speak of.
We have lingered about a match between Anne Page and
my cousin Slender, and this day we shall have our answer.
I hope I have your good will, father Page.
You have, Master Slender; I stand wholly for you:
but my wife, master doctor, is for you altogether.
Ay, be-gar; and de maid is love-a me: my nursh-a
Quickly tell me so mush.
What say you to young Master Fenton? he capers, he
dances, he has eyes of youth, he writes verses, he
speaks holiday, he smells April and May: he will
carryt, he will carryt; tis in his buttons; he
will carryt.
Not by my consent, I promise you. The gentleman is
of no having: he kept company with the wild prince
and Poins; he is of too high a region; he knows too
much. No, he shall not knit a knot in his fortunes
with the finger of my substance: if he take her,
let him take her simply; the wealth I have waits on
my consent, and my consent goes not that way.
I beseech you heartily, some of you go home with me
to dinner: besides your cheer, you shall have
sport; I will show you a monster. Master doctor,
you shall go; so shall you, Master Page; and you, Sir Hugh.
Well, fare you well: we shall have the freer wooing
at Master Pages.
Exeunt SHALLOW, and SLENDER
Go home, John Rugby; I come anon.
Exit RUGBY
Farewell, my hearts: I will to my honest knight
Falstaff, and drink canary with him.
Exit
[Aside]  I think I shall drink in pipe wine first
with him; Ill make him dance. Will you go, gentles?
Have with you to see this monster.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A room in FORDS house.
Enter MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE
What, John! What, Robert!
Quickly, quickly! is the buck-basket--
I warrant. What, Robin, I say!
Enter Servants with a basket
Come, come, come.
Here, set it down.
Give your men the charge; we must be brief.
Marry, as I told you before, John and Robert, be
ready here hard by in the brew-house: and when I
suddenly call you, come forth, and without any pause
or staggering take this basket on your shoulders:
that done, trudge with it in all haste, and carry
it among the whitsters in Datchet-mead, and there
empty it in the muddy ditch close by the Thames side.
You will do it?
I ha told them over and over; they lack no
direction. Be gone, and come when you are called.
Exeunt Servants
Here comes little Robin.
Enter ROBIN
How now, my eyas-musket! what news with you?
My master, Sir John, is come in at your back-door,
Mistress Ford, and requests your company.
You little Jack-a-Lent, have you been true to us?
Ay, Ill be sworn. My master knows not of your
being here and hath threatened to put me into
everlasting liberty if I tell you of it; for he
swears hell turn me away.
Thourt a good boy: this secrecy of thine shall be
a tailor to thee and shall make thee a new doublet
and hose. Ill go hide me.
Do so. Go tell thy master I am alone.
Exit ROBIN
Mistress Page, remember you your cue.
I warrant thee; if I do not act it, hiss me.
Exit
Go to, then: well use this unwholesome humidity,
this gross watery pumpion; well teach him to know
turtles from jays.
Enter FALSTAFF
Have I caught thee, my heavenly jewel? Why, now let
me die, for I have lived long enough: this is the
period of my ambition: O this blessed hour!
O sweet Sir John!
Mistress Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate,
Mistress Ford. Now shall I sin in my wish: I would
thy husband were dead: Ill speak it before the
best lord; I would make thee my lady.
I your lady, Sir John! alas, I should be a pitiful lady!
Let the court of France show me such another. I see
how thine eye would emulate the diamond: thou hast
the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the
ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or any tire of
Venetian admittance.
A plain kerchief, Sir John: my brows become nothing
else; nor that well neither.
By the Lord, thou art a traitor to say so: thou
wouldst make an absolute courtier; and the firm
fixture of thy foot would give an excellent motion
to thy gait in a semi-circled farthingale. I see
what thou wert, if Fortune thy foe were not, Nature
thy friend. Come, thou canst not hide it.
Believe me, there is no such thing in me.
What made me love thee? let that persuade thee
theres something extraordinary in thee. Come, I
cannot cog and say thou art this and that, like a
many of these lisping hawthorn-buds, that come like
women in mens apparel, and smell like Bucklersbury
in simple time; I cannot: but I love thee; none
but thee; and thou deservest it.
Do not betray me, sir. I fear you love Mistress Page.
Thou mightst as well say I love to walk by the
Counter-gate, which is as hateful to me as the reek
of a lime-kiln.
Well, heaven knows how I love you; and you shall one
day find it.
Keep in that mind; Ill deserve it.
Nay, I must tell you, so you do; or else I could not
be in that mind.
[Within]  Mistress Ford, Mistress Ford! heres
Mistress Page at the door, sweating and blowing and
looking wildly, and would needs speak with you presently.
She shall not see me: I will ensconce me behind the arras.
Pray you, do so: shes a very tattling woman.
FALSTAFF hides himself
Re-enter MISTRESS PAGE and ROBIN
Whats the matter? how now!
O Mistress Ford, what have you done? Youre shamed,
youre overthrown, youre undone for ever!
Whats the matter, good Mistress Page?
O well-a-day, Mistress Ford! having an honest man
to your husband, to give him such cause of suspicion!
What cause of suspicion?
What cause of suspicion! Out pon you! how am I
mistook in you!
Why, alas, whats the matter?
Your husbands coming hither, woman, with all the
officers in Windsor, to search for a gentleman that
he says is here now in the house by your consent, to
take an ill advantage of his assence: you are undone.
Tis not so, I hope.
Pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man
here! but tis most certain your husbands coming,
with half Windsor at his heels, to search for such a
one. I come before to tell you. If you know
yourself clear, why, I am glad of it; but if you
have a friend here convey, convey him out. Be not
amazed; call all your senses to you; defend your
reputation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever.
What shall I do? There is a gentleman my dear
friend; and I fear not mine own shame so much as his
peril: I had rather than a thousand pound he were
out of the house.
For shame! never stand you had rather and you
had rather: your husbands here at hand, bethink
you of some conveyance: in the house you cannot
hide him. O, how have you deceived me! Look, here
is a basket: if he be of any reasonable stature, he
may creep in here; and throw foul linen upon him, as
if it were going to bucking: or--it is whiting-time
--send him by your two men to Datchet-mead.
Hes too big to go in there. What shall I do?
[Coming forward]  Let me seet, let me seet, O, let
me seet! Ill in, Ill in. Follow your friends
counsel. Ill in.
What, Sir John Falstaff! Are these your letters, knight?
I love thee. Help me away. Let me creep in here.
Ill never--
Gets into the basket; they cover him with foul linen
Help to cover your master, boy. Call your men,
Mistress Ford. You dissembling knight!
What, John! Robert! John!
Exit ROBIN
Re-enter Servants
Go take up these clothes here quickly. Wheres the
cowl-staff? look, how you drumble! Carry them to
the laundress in Datchet-meat; quickly, come.
Enter FORD, PAGE, DOCTOR CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS
Pray you, come near: if I suspect without cause,
why then make sport at me; then let me be your jest;
I deserve it. How now! whither bear you this?
To the laundress, forsooth.
Why, what have you to do whither they bear it? You
were best meddle with buck-washing.
Buck! I would I could wash myself of the buck!
Buck, buck, buck! Ay, buck; I warrant you, buck;
and of the season too, it shall appear.
Exeunt Servants with the basket
Gentlemen, I have dreamed to-night; Ill tell you my
dream. Here, here, here be my keys: ascend my
chambers; search, seek, find out: Ill warrant
well unkennel the fox. Let me stop this way first.
Locking the door
So, now uncape.
Good Master Ford, be contented: you wrong yourself too much.
True, Master Page. Up, gentlemen: you shall see
sport anon: follow me, gentlemen.
Exit
This is fery fantastical humours and jealousies.
By gar, tis no the fashion of France; it is not
jealous in France.
Nay, follow him, gentlemen; see the issue of his search.
Exeunt PAGE, DOCTOR CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS
Is there not a double excellency in this?
I know not which pleases me better, that my husband
is deceived, or Sir John.
What a taking was he in when your husband asked who
was in the basket!
I am half afraid he will have need of washing; so
throwing him into the water will do him a benefit.
Hang him, dishonest rascal! I would all of the same
strain were in the same distress.
I think my husband hath some special suspicion of
Falstaffs being here; for I never saw him so gross
in his jealousy till now.
I will lay a plot to try that; and we will yet have
more tricks with Falstaff: his dissolute disease will
scarce obey this medicine.
Shall we send that foolish carrion, Mistress
Quickly, to him, and excuse his throwing into the
water; and give him another hope, to betray him to
another punishment?
We will do it: let him be sent for to-morrow,
eight oclock, to have amends.
Re-enter FORD, PAGE, DOCTOR CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS
I cannot find him: may be the knave bragged of that
he could not compass.
[Aside to MISTRESS FORD]  Heard you that?
You use me well, Master Ford, do you?
Ay, I do so.
Heaven make you better than your thoughts!
Amen!
You do yourself mighty wrong, Master Ford.
Ay, ay; I must bear it.
If there be any pody in the house, and in the
chambers, and in the coffers, and in the presses,
heaven forgive my sins at the day of judgment!
By gar, nor I too: there is no bodies.
Fie, fie, Master Ford! are you not ashamed? What
spirit, what devil suggests this imagination? I
would not ha your distemper in this kind for the
wealth of Windsor Castle.
Tis my fault, Master Page: I suffer for it.
You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife is as
honest a omans as I will desires among five
thousand, and five hundred too.
By gar, I see tis an honest woman.
Well, I promised you a dinner. Come, come, walk in
the Park: I pray you, pardon me; I will hereafter
make known to you why I have done this. Come,
wife; come, Mistress Page. I pray you, pardon me;
pray heartily, pardon me.
Lets go in, gentlemen; but, trust me, well mock
him. I do invite you to-morrow morning to my house
to breakfast: after, well a-birding together; I
have a fine hawk for the bush. Shall it be so?
Any thing.
If there is one, I shall make two in the company.
If dere be one or two, I shall make-a the turd.
Pray you, go, Master Page.
I pray you now, remembrance tomorrow on the lousy
knave, mine host.
Dat is good; by gar, with all my heart!
A lousy knave, to have his gibes and his mockeries!
Exeunt
SCENE IV. A room in PAGES house.
Enter FENTON and ANNE PAGE
I see I cannot get thy fathers love;
Therefore no more turn me to him, sweet Nan.
Alas, how then?
Why, thou must be thyself.
He doth object I am too great of birth--,
And that, my state being galld with my expense,
I seek to heal it only by his wealth:
Besides these, other bars he lays before me,
My riots past, my wild societies;
And tells me tis a thing impossible
I should love thee but as a property.
May be he tells you true.
No, heaven so speed me in my time to come!
Albeit I will confess thy fathers wealth
Was the first motive that I wood thee, Anne:
Yet, wooing thee, I found thee of more value
Than stamps in gold or sums in sealed bags;
And tis the very riches of thyself
That now I aim at.
Gentle Master Fenton,
Yet seek my fathers love; still seek it, sir:
If opportunity and humblest suit
Cannot attain it, why, then,--hark you hither!
They converse apart
Enter SHALLOW, SLENDER, and MISTRESS QUICKLY
Break their talk, Mistress Quickly: my kinsman shall
speak for himself.
Ill make a shaft or a bolt ont: slid, tis but
venturing.
Be not dismayed.
No, she shall not dismay me: I care not for that,
but that I am afeard.
Hark ye; Master Slender would speak a word with you.
I come to him.
Aside
This is my fathers choice.
O, what a world of vile ill-favord faults
Looks handsome in three hundred pounds a-year!
And how does good Master Fenton? Pray you, a word with you.
Shes coming; to her, coz. O boy, thou hadst a father!
I had a father, Mistress Anne; my uncle can tell you
good jests of him. Pray you, uncle, tell Mistress
Anne the jest, how my father stole two geese out of
a pen, good uncle.
Mistress Anne, my cousin loves you.
Ay, that I do; as well as I love any woman in
Gloucestershire.
He will maintain you like a gentlewoman.
Ay, that I will, come cut and long-tail, under the
degree of a squire.
He will make you a hundred and fifty pounds jointure.
Good Master Shallow, let him woo for himself.
Marry, I thank you for it; I thank you for that good
comfort. She calls you, coz: Ill leave you.
Now, Master Slender,--
Now, good Mistress Anne,--
What is your will?
My will! ods heartlings, thats a pretty jest
indeed! I neer made my will yet, I thank heaven; I
am not such a sickly creature, I give heaven praise.
I mean, Master Slender, what would you with me?
Truly, for mine own part, I would little or nothing
with you. Your father and my uncle hath made
motions: if it be my luck, so; if not, happy man be
his dole! They can tell you how things go better
than I can: you may ask your father; here he comes.
Enter PAGE and MISTRESS PAGE
Now, Master Slender: love him, daughter Anne.
Why, how now! what does Master Fenton here?
You wrong me, sir, thus still to haunt my house:
I told you, sir, my daughter is disposed of.
Nay, Master Page, be not impatient.
Good Master Fenton, come not to my child.
She is no match for you.
Sir, will you hear me?
No, good Master Fenton.
Come, Master Shallow; come, son Slender, in.
Knowing my mind, you wrong me, Master Fenton.
Exeunt PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
Speak to Mistress Page.
Good Mistress Page, for that I love your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all cheques, rebukes and manners,
I must advance the colours of my love
And not retire: let me have your good will.
Good mother, do not marry me to yond fool.
I mean it not; I seek you a better husband.
Thats my master, master doctor.
Alas, I had rather be set quick i the earth
And bowld to death with turnips!
Come, trouble not yourself. Good Master Fenton,
I will not be your friend nor enemy:
My daughter will I question how she loves you,
And as I find her, so am I affected.
Till then farewell, sir: she must needs go in;
Her father will be angry.
Farewell, gentle mistress: farewell, Nan.
Exeunt MISTRESS PAGE and ANNE PAGE
This is my doing, now: Nay, said I, will you cast
away your child on a fool, and a physician? Look on
Master Fenton: this is my doing.
I thank thee; and I pray thee, once to-night
Give my sweet Nan this ring: theres for thy pains.
Now heaven send thee good fortune!
Exit FENTON
A kind heart he hath: a woman would run through
fire and water for such a kind heart. But yet I
would my master had Mistress Anne; or I would
Master Slender had her; or, in sooth, I would Master
Fenton had her; I will do what I can for them all
three; for so I have promised, and Ill be as good
as my word; but speciously for Master Fenton. Well,
I must of another errand to Sir John Falstaff from
my two mistresses: what a beast am I to slack it!
Exit
SCENE V. A room in the Garter Inn.
Enter FALSTAFF and BARDOLPH
Bardolph, I say,--
Here, sir.
Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast int.
Exit BARDOLPH
Have I lived to be carried in a basket, like a
barrow of butchers offal, and to be thrown in the
Thames? Well, if I be served such another trick,
Ill have my brains taen out and buttered, and give
them to a dog for a new-years gift. The rogues
slighted me into the river with as little remorse as
they would have drowned a blind bitchs puppies,
fifteen i the litter: and you may know by my size
that I have a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the
bottom were as deep as hell, I should down. I had
been drowned, but that the shore was shelvy and
shallow,--a death that I abhor; for the water swells
a man; and what a thing should I have been when I
had been swelled! I should have been a mountain of mummy.
Re-enter BARDOLPH with sack
Heres Mistress Quickly, sir, to speak with you.
Let me pour in some sack to the Thames water; for my
bellys as cold as if I had swallowed snowballs for
pills to cool the reins. Call her in.
Come in, woman!
Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY
By your leave; I cry you mercy: give your worship
good morrow.
Take away these chalices. Go brew me a pottle of
sack finely.
With eggs, sir?
Simple of itself; Ill no pullet-sperm in my brewage.
Exit BARDOLPH
How now!
Marry, sir, I come to your worship from Mistress Ford.
Mistress Ford! I have had ford enough; I was thrown
into the ford; I have my belly full of ford.
Alas the day! good heart, that was not her fault:
she does so take on with her men; they mistook their erection.
So did I mine, to build upon a foolish womans promise.
Well, she laments, sir, for it, that it would yearn
your heart to see it. Her husband goes this morning
a-birding; she desires you once more to come to her
between eight and nine: I must carry her word
quickly: shell make you amends, I warrant you.
Well, I will visit her: tell her so; and bid her
think what a man is: let her consider his frailty,
and then judge of my merit.
I will tell her.
Do so. Between nine and ten, sayest thou?
Eight and nine, sir.
Well, be gone: I will not miss her.
Peace be with you, sir.
Exit
I marvel I hear not of Master Brook; he sent me word
to stay within: I like his money well. O, here he comes.
Enter FORD
Bless you, sir!
Now, master Brook, you come to know what hath passed
between me and Fords wife?
That, indeed, Sir John, is my business.
Master Brook, I will not lie to you: I was at her
house the hour she appointed me.
And sped you, sir?
Very ill-favoredly, Master Brook.
How so, sir? Did she change her determination?
No, Master Brook; but the peaking Cornuto her
husband, Master Brook, dwelling in a continual
larum of jealousy, comes me in the instant of our
encounter, after we had embraced, kissed, protested,
and, as it were, spoke the prologue of our comedy;
and at his heels a rabble of his companions, thither
provoked and instigated by his distemper, and,
forsooth, to search his house for his wifes love.
What, while you were there?
While I was there.
And did he search for you, and could not find you?
You shall hear. As good luck would have it, comes
in one Mistress Page; gives intelligence of Fords
