approach; and, in her invention and Fords wifes
distraction, they conveyed me into a buck-basket.
A buck-basket!
By the Lord, a buck-basket! rammed me in with foul
shirts and smocks, socks, foul stockings, greasy
napkins; that, Master Brook, there was the rankest
compound of villanous smell that ever offended nostril.
And how long lay you there?
Nay, you shall hear, Master Brook, what I have
suffered to bring this woman to evil for your good.
Being thus crammed in the basket, a couple of Fords
knaves, his hinds, were called forth by their
mistress to carry me in the name of foul clothes to
Datchet-lane: they took me on their shoulders; met
the jealous knave their master in the door, who
asked them once or twice what they had in their
basket: I quaked for fear, lest the lunatic knave
would have searched it; but fate, ordaining he
should be a cuckold, held his hand. Well: on went he
for a search, and away went I for foul clothes. But
mark the sequel, Master Brook: I suffered the pangs
of three several deaths; first, an intolerable
fright, to be detected with a jealous rotten
bell-wether; next, to be compassed, like a good
bilbo, in the circumference of a peck, hilt to
point, heel to head; and then, to be stopped in,
like a strong distillation, with stinking clothes
that fretted in their own grease: think of that,--a
man of my kidney,--think of that,--that am as subject
to heat as butter; a man of continual dissolution
and thaw: it was a miracle to scape suffocation.
And in the height of this bath, when I was more than
half stewed in grease, like a Dutch dish, to be
thrown into the Thames, and cooled, glowing hot,
in that surge, like a horse-shoe; think of
that,--hissing hot,--think of that, Master Brook.
In good sadness, I am sorry that for my sake you
have sufferd all this. My suit then is desperate;
youll undertake her no more?
Master Brook, I will be thrown into Etna, as I have
been into Thames, ere I will leave her thus. Her
husband is this morning gone a-birding: I have
received from her another embassy of meeting; twixt
eight and nine is the hour, Master Brook.
Tis past eight already, sir.
Is it? I will then address me to my appointment.
Come to me at your convenient leisure, and you shall
know how I speed; and the conclusion shall be
crowned with your enjoying her. Adieu. You shall
have her, Master Brook; Master Brook, you shall
cuckold Ford.
Exit
Hum! ha! is this a vision? is this a dream? do I
sleep? Master Ford awake! awake, Master Ford!
theres a hole made in your best coat, Master Ford.
This tis to be married! this tis to have linen
and buck-baskets! Well, I will proclaim myself
what I am: I will now take the lecher; he is at my
house; he cannot scape me; tis impossible he
should; he cannot creep into a halfpenny purse,
nor into a pepper-box: but, lest the devil that
guides him should aid him, I will search
impossible places. Though what I am I cannot avoid,
yet to be what I would not shall not make me tame:
if I have horns to make one mad, let the proverb go
with me: Ill be horn-mad.
Exit
ACT IV
SCENE I. A street.
Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS QUICKLY, and WILLIAM PAGE
Is he at Master Fords already, thinkst thou?
Sure he is by this, or will be presently: but,
truly, he is very courageous mad about his throwing
into the water. Mistress Ford desires you to come suddenly.
Ill be with her by and by; Ill but bring my young
man here to school. Look, where his master comes;
tis a playing-day, I see.
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS
How now, Sir Hugh! no school to-day?
No; Master Slender is let the boys leave to play.
Blessing of his heart!
Sir Hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing in
the world at his book. I pray you, ask him some
questions in his accidence.
Come hither, William; hold up your head; come.
Come on, sirrah; hold up your head; answer your
master, be not afraid.
William, how many numbers is in nouns?
Two.
Truly, I thought there had been one number more,
because they say, Ods nouns.
Peace your tattlings! What is fair, William?
Pulcher.
Polecats! there are fairer things than polecats, sure.
You are a very simplicity oman: I pray you peace.
What is lapis, William?
A stone.
And what is a stone, William?
A pebble.
No, it is lapis: I pray you, remember in your prain.
Lapis.
That is a good William. What is he, William, that
does lend articles?
Articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and be thus
declined, Singulariter, nominativo, hic, haec, hoc.
Nominativo, hig, hag, hog; pray you, mark:
genitivo, hujus. Well, what is your accusative case?
Accusativo, hinc.
I pray you, have your remembrance, child,
accusative, hung, hang, hog.
Hang-hog is Latin for bacon, I warrant you.
Leave your prabbles, oman. What is the focative
case, William?
O,--vocativo, O.
Remember, William; focative is caret.
And thats a good root.
Oman, forbear.
Peace!
What is your genitive case plural, William?
Genitive case!
Ay.
Genitive,--horum, harum, horum.
Vengeance of Jennys case! fie on her! never name
her, child, if she be a whore.
For shame, oman.
You do ill to teach the child such words: he
teaches him to hick and to hack, which theyll do
fast enough of themselves, and to call horum: fie upon you!
Oman, art thou lunatics? hast thou no
understandings for thy cases and the numbers of the
genders? Thou art as foolish Christian creatures as
I would desires.
Prithee, hold thy peace.
Show me now, William, some declensions of your pronouns.
Forsooth, I have forgot.
It is qui, quae, quod: if you forget your quies,
your quaes, and your quods, you must be
preeches. Go your ways, and play; go.
He is a better scholar than I thought he was.
He is a good sprag memory. Farewell, Mistress Page.
Adieu, good Sir Hugh.
Exit SIR HUGH EVANS
Get you home, boy. Come, we stay too long.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A room in FORDS house.
Enter FALSTAFF and MISTRESS FORD
Mistress Ford, your sorrow hath eaten up my
sufferance. I see you are obsequious in your love,
and I profess requital to a hairs breadth; not
only, Mistress Ford, in the simple
office of love, but in all the accoutrement,
complement and ceremony of it. But are you
sure of your husband now?
Hes a-birding, sweet Sir John.
[Within]  What, ho, gossip Ford! what, ho!
Step into the chamber, Sir John.
Exit FALSTAFF
Enter MISTRESS PAGE
How now, sweetheart! whos at home besides yourself?
Why, none but mine own people.
Indeed!
No, certainly.
Aside to her
Speak louder.
Truly, I am so glad you have nobody here.
Why?
Why, woman, your husband is in his old lunes again:
he so takes on yonder with my husband; so rails
against all married mankind; so curses all Eves
daughters, of what complexion soever; and so buffets
himself on the forehead, crying, Peer out, peer
out! that any madness I ever yet beheld seemed but
tameness, civility and patience, to this his
distemper he is in now: I am glad the fat knight is not here.
Why, does he talk of him?
Of none but him; and swears he was carried out, the
last time he searched for him, in a basket; protests
to my husband he is now here, and hath drawn him and
the rest of their company from their sport, to make
another experiment of his suspicion: but I am glad
the knight is not here; now he shall see his own foolery.
How near is he, Mistress Page?
Hard by; at street end; he will be here anon.
I am undone! The knight is here.
Why then you are utterly shamed, and hes but a dead
man. What a woman are you!--Away with him, away
with him! better shame than murder.
Which way should be go? how should I bestow him?
Shall I put him into the basket again?
Re-enter FALSTAFF
No, Ill come no more i the basket. May I not go
out ere he come?
Alas, three of Master Fords brothers watch the door
with pistols, that none shall issue out; otherwise
you might slip away ere he came. But what make you here?
What shall I do? Ill creep up into the chimney.
There they always use to discharge their
birding-pieces. Creep into the kiln-hole.
Where is it?
He will seek there, on my word. Neither press,
coffer, chest, trunk, well, vault, but he hath an
abstract for the remembrance of such places, and
goes to them by his note: there is no hiding you in the house.
Ill go out then.
If you go out in your own semblance, you die, Sir
John. Unless you go out disguised--
How might we disguise him?
Alas the day, I know not! There is no womans gown
big enough for him otherwise he might put on a hat,
a muffler and a kerchief, and so escape.
Good hearts, devise something: any extremity rather
than a mischief.
My maids aunt, the fat woman of Brentford, has a
gown above.
On my word, it will serve him; shes as big as he
is: and theres her thrummed hat and her muffler
too. Run up, Sir John.
Go, go, sweet Sir John: Mistress Page and I will
look some linen for your head.
Quick, quick! well come dress you straight: put
on the gown the while.
Exit FALSTAFF
I would my husband would meet him in this shape: he
cannot abide the old woman of Brentford; he swears
shes a witch; forbade her my house and hath
threatened to beat her.
Heaven guide him to thy husbands cudgel, and the
devil guide his cudgel afterwards!
But is my husband coming?
Ah, in good sadness, is he; and talks of the basket
too, howsoever he hath had intelligence.
Well try that; for Ill appoint my men to carry the
basket again, to meet him at the door with it, as
they did last time.
Nay, but hell be here presently: lets go dress him
like the witch of Brentford.
Ill first direct my men what they shall do with the
basket. Go up; Ill bring linen for him straight.
Exit
Hang him, dishonest varlet! we cannot misuse him enough.
Well leave a proof, by that which we will do,
Wives may be merry, and yet honest too:
We do not act that often jest and laugh;
Tis old, but true, Still swine eat all the draff.
Exit
Re-enter MISTRESS FORD with two Servants
Go, sirs, take the basket again on your shoulders:
your master is hard at door; if he bid you set it
down, obey him: quickly, dispatch.
Exit
Come, come, take it up.
Pray heaven it be not full of knight again.
I hope not; I had as lief bear so much lead.
Enter FORD, PAGE, SHALLOW, DOCTOR CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS
Ay, but if it prove true, Master Page, have you any
way then to unfool me again? Set down the basket,
villain! Somebody call my wife. Youth in a basket!
O you panderly rascals! theres a knot, a ging, a
pack, a conspiracy against me: now shall the devil
be shamed. What, wife, I say! Come, come forth!
Behold what honest clothes you send forth to bleaching!
Why, this passes, Master Ford; you are not to go
loose any longer; you must be pinioned.
Why, this is lunatics! this is mad as a mad dog!
Indeed, Master Ford, this is not well, indeed.
So say I too, sir.
Re-enter MISTRESS FORD
Come hither, Mistress Ford; Mistress Ford the honest
woman, the modest wife, the virtuous creature, that
hath the jealous fool to her husband! I suspect
without cause, mistress, do I?
Heaven be my witness you do, if you suspect me in
any dishonesty.
Well said, brazen-face! hold it out. Come forth, sirrah!
Pulling clothes out of the basket
This passes!
Are you not ashamed? let the clothes alone.
I shall find you anon.
Tis unreasonable! Will you take up your wifes
clothes? Come away.
Empty the basket, I say!
Why, man, why?
Master Page, as I am a man, there was one conveyed
out of my house yesterday in this basket: why may
not he be there again? In my house I am sure he is:
my intelligence is true; my jealousy is reasonable.
Pluck me out all the linen.
If you find a man there, he shall die a fleas death.
Heres no man.
By my fidelity, this is not well, Master Ford; this
wrongs you.
Master Ford, you must pray, and not follow the
imaginations of your own heart: this is jealousies.
Well, hes not here I seek for.
No, nor nowhere else but in your brain.
Help to search my house this one time. If I find
not what I seek, show no colour for my extremity; let
me for ever be your table-sport; let them say of
me, As jealous as Ford, Chat searched a hollow
walnut for his wifes leman. Satisfy me once more;
once more search with me.
What, ho, Mistress Page! come you and the old woman
down; my husband will come into the chamber.
Old woman! what old womans that?
Nay, it is my maids aunt of Brentford.
A witch, a quean, an old cozening quean! Have I not
forbid her my house? She comes of errands, does
she? We are simple men; we do not know whats
brought to pass under the profession of
fortune-telling. She works by charms, by spells,
by the figure, and such daubery as this is, beyond
our element we know nothing. Come down, you witch,
you hag, you; come down, I say!
Nay, good, sweet husband! Good gentlemen, let him
not strike the old woman.
Re-enter FALSTAFF in womans clothes, and MISTRESS PAGE
Come, Mother Prat; come, give me your hand.
Ill prat her.
Beating him
Out of my door, you witch, you hag, you baggage, you
polecat, you runyon! out, out! Ill conjure you,
Ill fortune-tell you.
Exit FALSTAFF
Are you not ashamed? I think you have killed the
poor woman.
Nay, he will do it. Tis a goodly credit for you.
Hang her, witch!
By the yea and no, I think the oman is a witch
indeed: I like not when a oman has a great peard;
I spy a great peard under his muffler.
Will you follow, gentlemen? I beseech you, follow;
see but the issue of my jealousy: if I cry out thus
upon no trail, never trust me when I open again.
Lets obey his humour a little further: come,
gentlemen.
Exeunt FORD, PAGE, SHALLOW, DOCTOR CAIUS, and SIR HUGH EVANS
Trust me, he beat him most pitifully.
Nay, by the mass, that he did not; he beat him most
unpitifully, methought.
Ill have the cudgel hallowed and hung oer the
altar; it hath done meritorious service.
What think you? may we, with the warrant of
womanhood and the witness of a good conscience,
pursue him with any further revenge?
The spirit of wantonness is, sure, scared out of
him: if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with
fine and recovery, he will never, I think, in the
way of waste, attempt us again.
Shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?
Yes, by all means; if it be but to scrape the
figures out of your husbands brains. If they can
find in their hearts the poor unvirtuous fat knight
shall be any further afflicted, we two will still be
the ministers.
Ill warrant theyll have him publicly shamed: and
methinks there would be no period to the jest,
should he not be publicly shamed.
Come, to the forge with it then; shape it: I would
not have things cool.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A room in the Garter Inn.
Enter Host and BARDOLPH
Sir, the Germans desire to have three of your
horses: the duke himself will be to-morrow at
court, and they are going to meet him.
What duke should that be comes so secretly? I hear
not of him in the court. Let me speak with the
gentlemen: they speak English?
Ay, sir; Ill call them to you.
They shall have my horses; but Ill make them pay;
Ill sauce them: they have had my house a week at
command; I have turned away my other guests: they
must come off; Ill sauce them. Come.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. A room in FORDS house.
Enter PAGE, FORD, MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and SIR HUGH EVANS
Tis one of the best discretions of a oman as ever
I did look upon.
And did he send you both these letters at an instant?
Within a quarter of an hour.
Pardon me, wife. Henceforth do what thou wilt;
I rather will suspect the sun with cold
Than thee with wantonness: now doth thy honour stand
In him that was of late an heretic,
As firm as faith.
Tis well, tis well; no more:
Be not as extreme in submission
As in offence.
But let our plot go forward: let our wives
Yet once again, to make us public sport,
Appoint a meeting with this old fat fellow,
Where we may take him and disgrace him for it.
There is no better way than that they spoke of.
How? to send him word theyll meet him in the park
at midnight? Fie, fie! hell never come.
You say he has been thrown in the rivers and has
been grievously peaten as an old oman: methinks
there should be terrors in him that he should not
come; methinks his flesh is punished, he shall have
no desires.
So think I too.
Devise but how youll use him when he comes,
And let us two devise to bring him thither.
There is an old tale goes that Herne the hunter,
Sometime a keeper here in Windsor forest,
Doth all the winter-time, at still midnight,
Walk round about an oak, with great raggd horns;
And there he blasts the tree and takes the cattle
And makes milch-kine yield blood and shakes a chain
In a most hideous and dreadful manner:
You have heard of such a spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed eld
Received and did deliver to our age
This tale of Herne the hunter for a truth.
Why, yet there want not many that do fear
In deep of night to walk by this Hernes oak:
But what of this?
Marry, this is our device;
That Falstaff at that oak shall meet with us.
Well, let it not be doubted but hell come:
And in this shape when you have brought him thither,
What shall be done with him? what is your plot?
That likewise have we thought upon, and thus:
Nan Page my daughter and my little son
And three or four more of their growth well dress
Like urchins, ouphes and fairies, green and white,
With rounds of waxen tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands: upon a sudden,
As Falstaff, she and I, are newly met,
Let them from forth a sawpit rush at once
With some diffused song: upon their sight,
We two in great amazedness will fly:
Then let them all encircle him about
And, fairy-like, to-pinch the unclean knight,
And ask him why, that hour of fairy revel,
In their so sacred paths he dares to tread
In shape profane.
And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed fairies pinch him sound
And burn him with their tapers.
The truth being known,
Well all present ourselves, dis-horn the spirit,
And mock him home to Windsor.
The children must
Be practised well to this, or theyll neer dot.
I will teach the children their behaviors; and I
will be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn the
knight with my taber.
That will be excellent. Ill go and buy them vizards.
My Nan shall be the queen of all the fairies,
Finely attired in a robe of white.
That silk will I go buy.
Aside
And in that time
Shall Master Slender steal my Nan away
And marry her at Eton. Go send to Falstaff straight.
Nay Ill to him again in name of Brook
Hell tell me all his purpose: sure, hell come.
Fear not you that. Go get us properties
And tricking for our fairies.
Let us about it: it is admirable pleasures and fery
honest knaveries.
Exeunt PAGE, FORD, and SIR HUGH EVANS
Go, Mistress Ford,
Send quickly to Sir John, to know his mind.
Exit MISTRESS FORD
Ill to the doctor: he hath my good will,
And none but he, to marry with Nan Page.
That Slender, though well landed, is an idiot;
And he my husband best of all affects.
The doctor is well moneyd, and his friends
Potent at court: he, none but he, shall have her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to crave her.
Exit
SCENE V. A room in the Garter Inn.
Enter Host and SIMPLE
What wouldst thou have, boor? what: thick-skin?
speak, breathe, discuss; brief, short, quick, snap.
Marry, sir, I come to speak with Sir John Falstaff
from Master Slender.
Theres his chamber, his house, his castle, his
standing-bed and truckle-bed; tis painted about
with the story of the Prodigal, fresh and new. Go
knock and call; hell speak like an Anthropophaginian
unto thee: knock, I say.
Theres an old woman, a fat woman, gone up into his
chamber: Ill be so bold as stay, sir, till she come
down; I come to speak with her, indeed.
Ha! a fat woman! the knight may be robbed: Ill
call. Bully knight! bully Sir John! speak from
thy lungs military: art thou there? it is thine
host, thine Ephesian, calls.
[Above]  How now, mine host!
Heres a Bohemian-Tartar tarries the coming down of
thy fat woman. Let her descend, bully, let her
descend; my chambers are honourable: fie! privacy?
fie!
Enter FALSTAFF
There was, mine host, an old fat woman even now with
me;  but shes gone.
Pray you, sir, wast not the wise woman of
Brentford?
Ay, marry, was it, mussel-shell: what would you with her?
My master, sir, Master Slender, sent to her, seeing
her go through the streets, to know, sir, whether
one Nym, sir, that beguiled him of a chain, had the
chain or no.
I spake with the old woman about it.
And what says she, I pray, sir?
Marry, she says that the very same man that
beguiled Master Slender of his chain cozened him of
it.
I would I could have spoken with the woman herself;
I had other things to have spoken with her too from
him.
What are they? let us know.
Ay, come; quick.
I may not conceal them, sir.
Conceal them, or thou diest.
Why, sir, they were nothing but about Mistress Anne
Page; to know if it were my masters fortune to
have her or no.
Tis, tis his fortune.
What, sir?
To have her, or no. Go; say the woman told me so.
May I be bold to say so, sir?
Ay, sir; like who more bold.
I thank your worship: I shall make my master glad
with these tidings.
Exit
Thou art clerkly, thou art clerkly, Sir John. Was
there a wise woman with thee?
Ay, that there was, mine host; one that hath taught
me more wit than ever I learned before in my life;
and I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for
my learning.
Enter BARDOLPH
Out, alas, sir! cozenage, mere cozenage!
Where be my horses? speak well of them, varletto.
Run away with the cozeners; for so soon as I came
beyond Eton, they threw me off from behind one of
them, in a slough of mire; and set spurs and away,
like three German devils, three Doctor Faustuses.
They are gone but to meet the duke, villain: do not
say they be fled; Germans are honest men.
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS
Where is mine host?
What is the matter, sir?
Have a care of your entertainments: there is a
friend of mine come to town tells me there is three
cozen-germans that has cozened all the hosts of
Readins, of Maidenhead, of Colebrook, of horses and
money. I tell you for good will, look you: you
are wise and full of gibes and vlouting-stocks, and
tis not convenient you should be cozened. Fare you well.
Exit
Enter DOCTOR CAIUS
Vere is mine host de Jarteer?
Here, master doctor, in perplexity and doubtful dilemma.
I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a me dat
you make grand preparation for a duke de Jamany: by
my trot, dere is no duke dat the court is know to
come. I tell you for good vill: adieu.
Exit
Hue and cry, villain, go! Assist me, knight. I am
undone! Fly, run, hue and cry, villain! I am undone!
Exeunt Host and BARDOLPH
I would all the world might be cozened; for I have
been cozened and beaten too. If it should come to
the ear of the court, how I have been transformed
and how my transformation hath been washed and
cudgelled, they would melt me out of my fat drop by
drop and liquor fishermens boots with me; I warrant
they would whip me with their fine wits till I were
as crest-fallen as a dried pear. I never prospered
since I forswore myself at primero. Well, if my
wind were but long enough to say my prayers, I would repent.
Enter MISTRESS QUICKLY
Now, whence come you?
From the two parties, forsooth.
The devil take one party and his dam the other! and
so they shall be both bestowed. I have suffered more
for their sakes, more than the villanous inconstancy
of mans disposition is able to bear.
And have not they suffered? Yes, I warrant;
speciously one of them; Mistress Ford, good heart,
is beaten black and blue, that you cannot see a
white spot about her.
What tellest thou me of black and blue? I was
beaten myself into all the colours of the rainbow;
and I was like to be apprehended for the witch of
Brentford: but that my admirable dexterity of wit,
my counterfeiting the action of an old woman,
delivered me, the knave constable had set me i the
stocks, i the common stocks, for a witch.
Sir, let me speak with you in your chamber: you
shall hear how things go; and, I warrant, to your
content. Here is a letter will say somewhat. Good
hearts, what ado here is to bring you together!
Sure, one of you does not serve heaven well, that
you are so crossed.
Come up into my chamber.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Another room in the Garter Inn.
Enter FENTON and Host
Master Fenton, talk not to me; my mind is heavy: I
will give over all.
Yet hear me speak. Assist me in my purpose,
And, as I am a gentleman, Ill give thee
A hundred pound in gold more than your loss.
I will hear you, Master Fenton; and I will at the
least keep your counsel.
From time to time I have acquainted you
With the dear love I bear to fair Anne Page;
Who mutually hath answerd my affection,
So far forth as herself might be her chooser,
Even to my wish: I have a letter from her
Of such contents as you will wonder at;
The mirth whereof so larded with my matter,
That neither singly can be manifested,
Without the show of both; fat Falstaff
Hath a great scene: the image of the jest
Ill show you here at large. Hark, good mine host.
To-night at Hernes oak, just twixt twelve and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Fairy Queen;
The purpose why, is here: in which disguise,
While other jests are something rank on foot,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender and with him at Eton
Immediately to marry: she hath consented: Now, sir,
Her mother, ever strong against that match
And firm for Doctor Caius, hath appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their minds,
And at the deanery, where a priest attends,
Straight marry her: to this her mothers plot
She seemingly obedient likewise hath
Made promise to the doctor. Now, thus it rests:
Her father means she shall be all in white,
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand and bid her go,
She shall go with him: her mother hath intended,
The better to denote her to the doctor,
For they must all be maskd and vizarded,
That quaint in green she shall be loose enrobed,
With ribands pendent, flaring bout her head;
And when the doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and, on that token,
The maid hath given consent to go with him.
Which means she to deceive, father or mother?
Both, my good host, to go along with me:
And here it rests, that youll procure the vicar
To stay for me at church twixt twelve and one,
And, in the lawful name of marrying,
To give our hearts united ceremony.
Well, husband your device; Ill to the vicar:
Bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
So shall I evermore be bound to thee;
Besides, Ill make a present recompense.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. A room in the Garter Inn.
Enter FALSTAFF and MISTRESS QUICKLY
Prithee, no more prattling; go. Ill hold. This is
the third time; I hope good luck lies in odd
numbers. Away I go. They say there is divinity in
odd numbers, either in nativity, chance, or death. Away!
Ill provide you a chain; and Ill do what I can to
get you a pair of horns.
Away, I say; time wears: hold up your head, and mince.
Exit MISTRESS QUICKLY
Enter FORD
How now, Master Brook! Master Brook, the matter
will be known to-night, or never. Be you in the
Park about midnight, at Hernes oak, and you shall
see wonders.
Went you not to her yesterday, sir, as you told me
you had appointed?
I went to her, Master Brook, as you see, like a poor
old man: but I came from her, Master Brook, like a
poor old woman. That same knave Ford, her husband,
hath the finest mad devil of jealousy in him,
Master Brook, that ever governed frenzy. I will tell
you: he beat me grievously, in the shape of a
woman; for in the shape of man, Master Brook, I fear
not Goliath with a weavers beam; because I know
also life is a shuttle. I am in haste; go along
with me: Ill tell you all, Master Brook. Since I
plucked geese, played truant and whipped top, I knew
not what twas to be beaten till lately. Follow
me: Ill tell you strange things of this knave
Ford, on whom to-night I will be revenged, and I
will deliver his wife into your hand. Follow.
Strange things in hand, Master Brook! Follow.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Windsor Park.
Enter PAGE, SHALLOW, and SLENDER
Come, come; well couch i the castle-ditch till we
see the light of our fairies. Remember, son Slender,
my daughter.
Ay, forsooth; I have spoke with her and we have a
nay-word how to know one another: I come to her in
white, and cry mum; she cries budget; and by
that we know one another.
Thats good too: but what needs either your mum
or her budget? the white will decipher her well
enough. It hath struck ten oclock.
The night is dark; light and spirits will become it
well. Heaven prosper our sport! No man means evil
but the devil, and we shall know him by his horns.
Lets away; follow me.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A street leading to the Park.
Enter MISTRESS PAGE, MISTRESS FORD, and DOCTOR CAIUS
Master doctor, my daughter is in green: when you
see your time, take her by the band, away with her
to the deanery, and dispatch it quickly. Go before
into the Park: we two must go together.
I know vat I have to do. Adieu.
Fare you well, sir.
Exit DOCTOR CAIUS
My husband will not rejoice so much at the abuse of
Falstaff as he will chafe at the doctors marrying
my daughter: but tis no matter; better a little
chiding than a great deal of heart-break.
Where is Nan now and her troop of fairies, and the
Welsh devil Hugh?
They are all couched in a pit hard by Hernes oak,
with obscured lights; which, at the very instant of
Falstaffs and our meeting, they will at once
display to the night.
That cannot choose but amaze him.
If he be not amazed, he will be mocked; if he be
amazed, he will every way be mocked.
Well betray him finely.
Against such lewdsters and their lechery
Those that betray them do no treachery.
The hour draws on. To the oak, to the oak!
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Windsor Park.
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS, disguised, with others as Fairies
Trib, trib, fairies; come; and remember your parts:
be pold, I pray you; follow me into the pit; and
when I give the watch-ords, do as I pid you:
come, come; trib, trib.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Another part of the Park.
Enter FALSTAFF disguised as Herne
The Windsor bell hath struck twelve; the minute
draws on. Now, the hot-blooded gods assist me!
Remember, Jove, thou wast a bull for thy Europa; love
set on thy horns. O powerful love! that, in some
respects, makes a beast a man, in some other, a man
a beast. You were also, Jupiter, a swan for the love
of Leda. O omnipotent Love! how near the god drew
to the complexion of a goose! A fault done first in
the form of a beast. O Jove, a beastly fault! And
then another fault in the semblance of a fowl; think
on t, Jove; a foul fault! When gods have hot
backs, what shall poor men do? For me, I am here a
Windsor stag; and the fattest, I think, i the
forest. Send me a cool rut-time, Jove, or who can
blame me to piss my tallow? Who comes here? my
doe?
Enter MISTRESS FORD and MISTRESS PAGE
Sir John! art thou there, my deer? my male deer?
My doe with the black scut! Let the sky rain
potatoes; let it thunder to the tune of Green
Sleeves, hail kissing-comfits and snow eringoes; let
there come a tempest of provocation, I will shelter me here.
Mistress Page is come with me, sweetheart.
Divide me like a bribe buck, each a haunch: I will
keep my sides to myself, my shoulders for the fellow
of this walk, and my horns I bequeath your husbands.
Am I a woodman, ha? Speak I like Herne the hunter?
Why, now is Cupid a child of conscience; he makes
restitution. As I am a true spirit, welcome!
Noise within
Alas, what noise?
Heaven forgive our sins
What should this be?
Away, away!
They run off
I think the devil will not have me damned, lest the
oil thats in me should set hell on fire; he would
never else cross me thus.
Enter SIR HUGH EVANS, disguised as before; PISTOL,  as Hobgoblin; MISTRESS QUICKLY, ANNE PAGE, and others, as Fairies, with tapers
Fairies, black, grey, green, and white,
You moonshine revellers and shades of night,
You orphan heirs of fixed destiny,
Attend your office and your quality.
Crier Hobgoblin, make the fairy oyes.
Elves, list your names; silence, you airy toys.
Cricket, to Windsor chimneys shalt thou leap:
Where fires thou findst unraked and hearths unswept,
There pinch the maids as blue as bilberry:
Our radiant queen hates sluts and sluttery.
They are fairies; he that speaks to them shall die:
Ill wink and couch: no man their works must eye.
Lies down upon his face
Wheres Bede? Go you, and where you find a maid
That, ere she sleep, has thrice her prayers said,
Raise up the organs of her fantasy;
Sleep she as sound as careless infancy:
But those as sleep and think not on their sins,
Pinch them, arms, legs, backs, shoulders, sides and shins.
About, about;
Search Windsor Castle, elves, within and out:
Strew good luck, ouphes, on every sacred room:
That it may stand till the perpetual doom,
In state as wholesome as in state tis fit,
Worthy the owner, and the owner it.
The several chairs of order look you scour
With juice of balm and every precious flower:
Each fair instalment, coat, and several crest,
With loyal blazon, evermore be blest!
And nightly, meadow-fairies, look you sing,
Like to the Garters compass, in a ring:
The expressure that it bears, green let it be,
More fertile-fresh than all the field to see;
And Honi soit qui mal y pense write
In emerald tufts, flowers purple, blue and white;
Let sapphire, pearl and rich embroidery,
Buckled below fair knighthoods bending knee:
Fairies use flowers for their charactery.
Away; disperse: but till tis one oclock,
Our dance of custom round about the oak
Of Herne the hunter, let us not forget.
Pray you, lock hand in hand; yourselves in order set
And twenty glow-worms shall our lanterns be,
To guide our measure round about the tree.
But, stay; I smell a man of middle-earth.
Heavens defend me from that Welsh fairy, lest he
transform me to a piece of cheese!
Vile worm, thou wast oerlookd even in thy birth.
With trial-fire touch me his finger-end:
If he be chaste, the flame will back descend
And turn him to no pain; but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted heart.
A trial, come.
Come, will this wood take fire?
They burn him with their tapers
Oh, Oh, Oh!
Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire!
About him, fairies; sing a scornful rhyme;
And, as you trip, still pinch him to your time.
SONG.
Fie on sinful fantasy!
Fie on lust and luxury!
Lust is but a bloody fire,
Kindled with unchaste desire,
Fed in heart, whose flames aspire
As thoughts do blow them, higher and higher.
Pinch him, fairies, mutually;
Pinch him for his villany;
Pinch him, and burn him, and turn him about,
Till candles and starlight and moonshine be out.
During this song they pinch FALSTAFF. DOCTOR CAIUS  comes one way, and steals away a boy in green;  SLENDER another way, and takes off a boy in white;  and FENTON comes and steals away ANN PAGE.  A noise of hunting is heard within. All the  Fairies run away. FALSTAFF pulls off his bucks head, and rises
Enter PAGE, FORD, MISTRESS PAGE, and MISTRESS FORD
Nay, do not fly; I think we have watchd you now
Will none but Herne the hunter serve your turn?
I pray you, come, hold up the jest no higher
Now, good Sir John, how like you Windsor wives?
See you these, husband? do not these fair yokes
Become the forest better than the town?
Now, sir, whos a cuckold now? Master Brook,
Falstaffs a knave, a cuckoldly knave; here are his
horns, Master Brook: and, Master Brook, he hath
enjoyed nothing of Fords but his buck-basket, his
cudgel, and twenty pounds of money, which must be
paid to Master Brook; his horses are arrested for
it, Master Brook.
Sir John, we have had ill luck; we could never meet.
I will never take you for my love again; but I will
always count you my deer.
I do begin to perceive that I am made an ass.
Ay, and an ox too: both the proofs are extant.
And these are not fairies? I was three or four
times in the thought they were not fairies: and yet
the guiltiness of my mind, the sudden surprise of my
powers, drove the grossness of the foppery into a
received belief, in despite of the teeth of all
rhyme and reason, that they were fairies. See now
how wit may be made a Jack-a-Lent, when tis upon
ill employment!
Sir John Falstaff, serve Got, and leave your
desires, and fairies will not pinse you.
Well said, fairy Hugh.
And leave your jealousies too, I pray you.
I will never mistrust my wife again till thou art
able to woo her in good English.
Have I laid my brain in the sun and dried it, that
it wants matter to prevent so gross oerreaching as
this? Am I ridden with a Welsh goat too? shall I
have a coxcomb of frize? Tis time I were choked
with a piece of toasted cheese.
Seese is not good to give putter; your belly is all putter.
Seese and putter! have I lived to stand at the
taunt of one that makes fritters of English? This
is enough to be the decay of lust and late-walking
through the realm.
Why Sir John, do you think, though we would have the
virtue out of our hearts by the head and shoulders
and have given ourselves without scruple to hell,
that ever the devil could have made you our delight?
What, a hodge-pudding? a bag of flax?
A puffed man?
Old, cold, withered and of intolerable entrails?
And one that is as slanderous as Satan?
And as poor as Job?
And as wicked as his wife?
And given to fornications, and to taverns and sack
and wine and metheglins, and to drinkings and
swearings and starings, pribbles and prabbles?
Well, I am your theme: you have the start of me; I
am dejected; I am not able to answer the Welsh
flannel; ignorance itself is a plummet oer me: use
me as you will.
Marry, sir, well bring you to Windsor, to one
Master Brook, that you have cozened of money, to
whom you should have been a pander: over and above
that you have suffered, I think to repay that money
will be a biting affliction.
Yet be cheerful, knight: thou shalt eat a posset
to-night at my house; where I will desire thee to
laugh at my wife, that now laughs at thee: tell her
Master Slender hath married her daughter.
[Aside]  Doctors doubt that: if Anne Page be my
daughter, she is, by this, Doctor Caius wife.
Enter SLENDER
Whoa ho! ho, father Page!
Son, how now! how now, son! have you dispatched?
Dispatched! Ill make the best in Gloucestershire
know ont; would I were hanged, la, else.
Of what, son?
I came yonder at Eton to marry Mistress Anne Page,
and shes a great lubberly boy. If it had not been
i the church, I would have swinged him, or he
should have swinged me. If I did not think it had
been Anne Page, would I might never stir!--and tis
a postmasters boy.
Upon my life, then, you took the wrong.
What need you tell me that? I think so, when I took
a boy for a girl. If I had been married to him, for
all he was in womans apparel, I would not have had
him.
Why, this is your own folly. Did not I tell you how
you should know my daughter by her garments?
I went to her in white, and cried mum, and she
cried budget, as Anne and I had appointed; and yet
it was not Anne, but a postmasters boy.
Good George, be not angry: I knew of your purpose;
turned my daughter into green; and, indeed, she is
now with the doctor at the deanery, and there married.
Enter DOCTOR CAIUS
Vere is Mistress Page? By gar, I am cozened: I ha
married un garcon, a boy; un paysan, by gar, a boy;
it is not Anne Page: by gar, I am cozened.
Why, did you take her in green?
Ay, by gar, and tis a boy: by gar, Ill raise all Windsor.
Exit
This is strange. Who hath got the right Anne?
My heart misgives me: here comes Master Fenton.
Enter FENTON and ANNE PAGE
How now, Master Fenton!
Pardon, good father! good my mother, pardon!
Now, mistress, how chance you went not with Master Slender?
Why went you not with master doctor, maid?
You do amaze her: hear the truth of it.
You would have married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in love.
The truth is, she and I, long since contracted,
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolve us.
The offence is holy that she hath committed;
And this deceit loses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or unduteous title,
Since therein she doth evitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed hours,
Which forced marriage would have brought upon her.
Stand not amazed; here is no remedy:
In love the heavens themselves do guide the state;
Money buys lands, and wives are sold by fate.
I am glad, though you have taen a special stand to
strike at me, that your arrow hath glanced.
Well, what remedy? Fenton, heaven give thee joy!
What cannot be eschewd must be embraced.
When night-dogs run, all sorts of deer are chased.
Well, I will muse no further. Master Fenton,
Heaven give you many, many merry days!
Good husband, let us every one go home,
And laugh this sport oer by a country fire;
Sir John and all.
Let it be so. Sir John,
To Master Brook you yet shall hold your word
For he tonight shall lie with Mistress Ford.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Athens. The palace of THESEUS.
Enter THESEUS, HIPPOLYTA, PHILOSTRATE, and Attendants
Now, fair Hippolyta, our nuptial hour
