Hath your grace neer a brother like you? Your
father got excellent husbands, if a maid could come by them.
Will you have me, lady?
No, my lord, unless I might have another for
working-days: your grace is too costly to wear
every day. But, I beseech your grace, pardon me: I
was born to speak all mirth and no matter.
Your silence most offends me, and to be merry best
becomes you; for, out of question, you were born in
a merry hour.
No, sure, my lord, my mother cried; but then there
was a star danced, and under that was I born.
Cousins, God give you joy!
Niece, will you look to those things I told you of?
I cry you mercy, uncle. By your graces pardon.
Exit
By my troth, a pleasant-spirited lady.
Theres little of the melancholy element in her, my
lord: she is never sad but when she sleeps, and
not ever sad then; for I have heard my daughter say,
she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked
herself with laughing.
She cannot endure to hear tell of a husband.
O, by no means: she mocks all her wooers out of suit.
She were an excellent wife for Benedict.
O Lord, my lord, if they were but a week married,
they would talk themselves mad.
County Claudio, when mean you to go to church?
To-morrow, my lord: time goes on crutches till love
have all his rites.
Not till Monday, my dear son, which is hence a just
seven-night; and a time too brief, too, to have all
things answer my mind.
Come, you shake the head at so long a breathing:
but, I warrant thee, Claudio, the time shall not go
dully by us. I will in the interim undertake one of
Hercules labours; which is, to bring Signior
Benedick and the Lady Beatrice into a mountain of
affection the one with the other. I would fain have
it a match, and I doubt not but to fashion it, if
you three will but minister such assistance as I
shall give you direction.
My lord, I am for you, though it cost me ten
nights watchings.
And I, my lord.
And you too, gentle Hero?
I will do any modest office, my lord, to help my
cousin to a good husband.
And Benedick is not the unhopefullest husband that
I know. Thus far can I praise him; he is of a noble
strain, of approved valour and confirmed honesty. I
will teach you how to humour your cousin, that she
shall fall in love with Benedick; and I, with your
two helps, will so practise on Benedick that, in
despite of his quick wit and his queasy stomach, he
shall fall in love with Beatrice. If we can do this,
Cupid is no longer an archer: hi s glory shall be
ours, for we are the only love-gods. Go in with me,
and I will tell you my drift.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same.
Enter DON JOHN and BORACHIO
It is so; the Count Claudio shall marry the
daughter of Leonato.
Yea, my lord; but I can cross it.
Any bar, any cross, any impediment will be
medicinable to me: I am sick in displeasure to him,
and whatsoever comes athwart his affection ranges
evenly with mine. How canst thou cross this marriage?
Not honestly, my lord; but so covertly that no
dishonesty shall appear in me.
Show me briefly how.
I think I told your lordship a year since, how much
I am in the favour of Margaret, the waiting
gentlewoman to Hero.
I remember.
I can, at any unseasonable instant of the night,
appoint her to look out at her ladys chamber window.
What life is in that, to be the death of this marriage?
The poison of that lies in you to temper. Go you to
the prince your brother; spare not to tell him that
he hath wronged his honour in marrying the renowned
Claudio--whose estimation do you mightily hold
up--to a contaminated stale, such a one as Hero.
What proof shall I make of that?
Proof enough to misuse the prince, to vex Claudio,
to undo Hero and kill Leonato. Look you for any
other issue?
Only to despite them, I will endeavour any thing.
Go, then; find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and
the Count Claudio alone: tell them that you know
that Hero loves me; intend a kind of zeal both to the
prince and Claudio, as,--in love of your brothers
honour, who hath made this match, and his friends
reputation, who is thus like to be cozened with the
semblance of a maid,--that you have discovered
thus. They will scarcely believe this without trial:
offer them instances; which shall bear no less
likelihood than to see me at her chamber-window,
hear me call Margaret Hero, hear Margaret term me
Claudio; and bring them to see this the very night
before the intended wedding,--for in the meantime I
will so fashion the matter that Hero shall be
absent,--and there shall appear such seeming truth
of Heros disloyalty that jealousy shall be called
assurance and all the preparation overthrown.
Grow this to what adverse issue it can, I will put
it in practise. Be cunning in the working this, and
thy fee is a thousand ducats.
Be you constant in the accusation, and my cunning
shall not shame me.
I will presently go learn their day of marriage.
Exeunt
SCENE III. LEONATOS orchard.
Enter BENEDICK
Boy!
Enter Boy
Signior?
In my chamber-window lies a book: bring it hither
to me in the orchard.
I am here already, sir.
I know that; but I would have thee hence, and here again.
Exit Boy
I do much wonder that one man, seeing how much
another man is a fool when he dedicates his
behaviors to love, will, after he hath laughed at
such shallow follies in others, become the argument
of his own scorn by failing in love: and such a man
is Claudio. I have known when there was no music
with him but the drum and the fife; and now had he
rather hear the tabour and the pipe: I have known
when he would have walked ten mile a-foot to see a
good armour; and now will he lie ten nights awake,
carving the fashion of a new doublet. He was wont to
speak plain and to the purpose, like an honest man
and a soldier; and now is he turned orthography; his
words are a very fantastical banquet, just so many
strange dishes. May I be so converted and see with
these eyes? I cannot tell; I think not: I will not
be sworn, but love may transform me to an oyster; but
Ill take my oath on it, till he have made an oyster
of me, he shall never make me such a fool. One woman
is fair, yet I am well; another is wise, yet I am
well; another virtuous, yet I am well; but till all
graces be in one woman, one woman shall not come in
my grace. Rich she shall be, thats certain; wise,
or Ill none; virtuous, or Ill never cheapen her;
fair, or Ill   never look on her; mild, or come not
near me; noble, or not I for an angel; of good
discourse, an excellent musician, and her hair shall
be of what colour it please God. Ha! the prince and
Monsieur Love! I will hide me in the arbour.
Withdraws
Enter DON PEDRO, CLAUDIO, and LEONATO
Come, shall we hear this music?
Yea, my good lord. How still the evening is,
As hushd on purpose to grace harmony!
See you where Benedick hath hid himself?
O, very well, my lord: the music ended,
Well fit the kid-fox with a pennyworth.
Enter BALTHASAR with Music
Come, Balthasar, well hear that song again.
O, good my lord, tax not so bad a voice
To slander music any more than once.
It is the witness still of excellency
To put a strange face on his own perfection.
I pray thee, sing, and let me woo no more.
Because you talk of wooing, I will sing;
Since many a wooer doth commence his suit
To her he thinks not worthy, yet he wooes,
Yet will he swear he loves.
Now, pray thee, come;
Or, if thou wilt hold longer argument,
Do it in notes.
Note this before my notes;
Theres not a note of mine thats worth the noting.
Why, these are very crotchets that he speaks;
Note, notes, forsooth, and nothing.
Air
Now, divine air! now is his soul ravished! Is it
not strange that sheeps guts should hale souls out
of mens bodies? Well, a horn for my money, when
alls done.
The Song
Sigh no more, ladies, sigh no more,
Men were deceivers ever,
One foot in sea and one on shore,
To one thing constant never:
Then sigh not so, but let them go,
And be you blithe and bonny,
Converting all your sounds of woe
Into Hey nonny, nonny.
Sing no more ditties, sing no moe,
Of dumps so dull and heavy;
The fraud of men was ever so,
Since summer first was leafy:
Then sigh not so,  and c.
By my troth, a good song.
And an ill singer, my lord.
Ha, no, no, faith; thou singest well enough for a shift.
An he had been a dog that should have howled thus,
they would have hanged him: and I pray God his bad
voice bode no mischief. I had as lief have heard the
night-raven, come what plague could have come after
it.
Yea, marry, dost thou hear, Balthasar? I pray thee,
get us some excellent music; for to-morrow night we
would have it at the Lady Heros chamber-window.
The best I can, my lord.
Do so: farewell.
Exit BALTHASAR
Come hither, Leonato. What was it you told me of
to-day, that your niece Beatrice was in love with
Signior Benedick?
O, ay: stalk on. stalk on; the fowl sits. I did
never think that lady would have loved any man.
No, nor I neither; but most wonderful that she
should so dote on Signior Benedick, whom she hath in
all outward behaviors seemed ever to abhor.
Ist possible? Sits the wind in that corner?
By my troth, my lord, I cannot tell what to think
of it but that she loves him with an enraged
affection: it is past the infinite of thought.
May be she doth but counterfeit.
Faith, like enough.
O God, counterfeit! There was never counterfeit of
passion came so near the life of passion as she
discovers it.
Why, what effects of passion shows she?
Bait the hook well; this fish will bite.
What effects, my lord? She will sit you, you heard
my daughter tell you how.
She did, indeed.
How, how, pray you? You amaze me: I would have I
thought her spirit had been invincible against all
assaults of affection.
I would have sworn it had, my lord; especially
against Benedick.
I should think this a gull, but that the
white-bearded fellow speaks it: knavery cannot,
sure, hide himself in such reverence.
He hath taen the infection: hold it up.
Hath she made her affection known to Benedick?
No; and swears she never will: thats her torment.
Tis true, indeed; so your daughter says: Shall
I, says she, that have so oft encountered him
with scorn, write to him that I love him?
This says she now when she is beginning to write to
him; for shell be up twenty times a night, and
there will she sit in her smock till she have writ a
sheet of paper: my daughter tells us all.
Now you talk of a sheet of paper, I remember a
pretty jest your daughter told us of.
O, when she had writ it and was reading it over, she
found Benedick and Beatrice between the sheet?
That.
O, she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence;
railed at herself, that she should be so immodest
to write to one that she knew would flout her; I
measure him, says she, by my own spirit; for I
should flout him, if he writ to me; yea, though I
love him, I should.
Then down upon her knees she falls, weeps, sobs,
beats her heart, tears her hair, prays, curses; O
sweet Benedick! God give me patience!
She doth indeed; my daughter says so: and the
ecstasy hath so much overborne her that my daughter
is sometime afeared she will do a desperate outrage
to herself: it is very true.
It were good that Benedick knew of it by some
other, if she will not discover it.
To what end? He would make but a sport of it and
torment the poor lady worse.
An he should, it were an alms to hang him. Shes an
excellent sweet lady; and, out of all suspicion,
she is virtuous.
And she is exceeding wise.
In every thing but in loving Benedick.
O, my lord, wisdom and blood combating in so tender
a body, we have ten proofs to one that blood hath
the victory. I am sorry for her, as I have just
cause, being her uncle and her guardian.
I would she had bestowed this dotage on me: I would
have daffed all other respects and made her half
myself. I pray you, tell Benedick of it, and hear
what a will say.
Were it good, think you?
Hero thinks surely she will die; for she says she
will die, if he love her not, and she will die, ere
she make her love known, and she will die, if he woo
her, rather than she will bate one breath of her
accustomed crossness.
She doth well: if she should make tender of her
love, tis very possible hell scorn it; for the
man, as you know all, hath a contemptible spirit.
He is a very proper man.
He hath indeed a good outward happiness.
Before God! and, in my mind, very wise.
He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit.
And I take him to be valiant.
As Hector, I assure you: and in the managing of
quarrels you may say he is wise; for either he
avoids them with great discretion, or undertakes
them with a most Christian-like fear.
If he do fear God, a must necessarily keep peace:
if he break the peace, he ought to enter into a
quarrel with fear and trembling.
And so will he do; for the man doth fear God,
howsoever it seems not in him by some large jests
he will make. Well I am sorry for your niece. Shall
we go seek Benedick, and tell him of her love?
Never tell him, my lord: let her wear it out with
good counsel.
Nay, thats impossible: she may wear her heart out first.
Well, we will hear further of it by your daughter:
let it cool the while. I love Benedick well; and I
could wish he would modestly examine himself, to see
how much he is unworthy so good a lady.
My lord, will you walk? dinner is ready.
If he do not dote on her upon this, I will never
trust my expectation.
Let there be the same net spread for her; and that
must your daughter and her gentlewomen carry. The
sport will be, when they hold one an opinion of
anothers dotage, and no such matter: thats the
scene that I would see, which will be merely a
dumb-show. Let us send her to call him in to dinner.
Exeunt DON PEDRO, CLAUDIO, and LEONATO
[Coming forward]  This can be no trick: the
conference was sadly borne. They have the truth of
this from Hero. They seem to pity the lady: it
seems her affections have their full bent. Love me!
why, it must be requited. I hear how I am censured:
they say I will bear myself proudly, if I perceive
the love come from her; they say too that she will
rather die than give any sign of affection. I did
never think to marry: I must not seem proud: happy
are they that hear their detractions and can put
them to mending. They say the lady is fair; tis a
truth, I can bear them witness; and virtuous; tis
so, I cannot reprove it; and wise, but for loving
me; by my troth, it is no addition to her wit, nor
no great argument of her folly, for I will be
horribly in love with her. I may chance have some
odd quirks and remnants of wit broken on me,
because I have railed so long against marriage: but
doth not the appetite alter? a man loves the meat
in his youth that he cannot endure in his age.
Shall quips and sentences and these paper bullets of
the brain awe a man from the career of his humour?
No, the world must be peopled. When I said I would
die a bachelor, I did not think I should live till I
were married. Here comes Beatrice. By this day!
shes a fair lady: I do spy some marks of love in
her.
Enter BEATRICE
Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner.
Fair Beatrice, I thank you for your pains.
I took no more pains for those thanks than you take
pains to thank me: if it had been painful, I would
not have come.
You take pleasure then in the message?
Yea, just so much as you may take upon a knifes
point and choke a daw withal. You have no stomach,
signior: fare you well.
Exit
Ha! Against my will I am sent to bid you come in
to dinner; theres a double meaning in that I took
no more pains for those thanks than you took pains
to thank me. thats as much as to say, Any pains
that I take for you is as easy as thanks. If I do
not take pity of her, I am a villain; if I do not
love her, I am a Jew. I will go get her picture.
Exit
ACT III
SCENE I. LEONATOS garden.
Enter HERO, MARGARET, and URSULA
Good Margaret, run thee to the parlor;
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice
Proposing with the prince and Claudio:
Whisper her ear and tell her, I and Ursula
Walk in the orchard and our whole discourse
Is all of her; say that thou overheardst us;
And bid her steal into the pleached bower,
Where honeysuckles, ripend by the sun,
Forbid the sun to enter, like favourites,
Made proud by princes, that advance their pride
Against that power that bred it: there will she hide her,
To listen our purpose.  This is thy office;
Bear thee well in it and leave us alone.
Ill make her come, I warrant you, presently.
Exit
Now, Ursula, when Beatrice doth come,
As we do trace this alley up and down,
Our talk must only be of Benedick.
When I do name him, let it be thy part
To praise him more than ever man did merit:
My talk to thee must be how Benedick
Is sick in love with Beatrice. Of this matter
Is little Cupids crafty arrow made,
That only wounds by hearsay.
Enter BEATRICE, behind
Now begin;
For look where Beatrice, like a lapwing, runs
Close by the ground, to hear our conference.
The pleasantst angling is to see the fish
Cut with her golden oars the silver stream,
And greedily devour the treacherous bait:
So angle we for Beatrice; who even now
Is couched in the woodbine coverture.
Fear you not my part of the dialogue.
Then go we near her, that her ear lose nothing
Of the false sweet bait that we lay for it.
Approaching the bower
No, truly, Ursula, she is too disdainful;
I know her spirits are as coy and wild
As haggerds of the rock.
But are you sure
That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely?
So says the prince and my new-trothed lord.
And did they bid you tell her of it, madam?
They did entreat me to acquaint her of it;
But I persuaded them, if they loved Benedick,
To wish him wrestle with affection,
And never to let Beatrice know of it.
Why did you so? Doth not the gentleman
Deserve as full as fortunate a bed
As ever Beatrice shall couch upon?
O god of love! I know he doth deserve
As much as may be yielded to a man:
But Nature never framed a womans heart
Of prouder stuff than that of Beatrice;
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes,
Misprising what they look on, and her wit
Values itself so highly that to her
All matter else seems weak: she cannot love,
Nor take no shape nor project of affection,
She is so self-endeared.
Sure, I think so;
And therefore certainly it were not good
She knew his love, lest she make sport at it.
Why, you speak truth. I never yet saw man,
How wise, how noble, young, how rarely featured,
But she would spell him backward: if fair-faced,
She would swear the gentleman should be her sister;
If black, why, Nature, drawing of an antique,
Made a foul blot; if tall, a lance ill-headed;
If low, an agate very vilely cut;
If speaking, why, a vane blown with all winds;
If silent, why, a block moved with none.
So turns she every man the wrong side out
And never gives to truth and virtue that
Which simpleness and merit purchaseth.
Sure, sure, such carping is not commendable.
No, not to be so odd and from all fashions
As Beatrice is, cannot be commendable:
But who dare tell her so? If I should speak,
She would mock me into air; O, she would laugh me
Out of myself, press me to death with wit.
Therefore let Benedick, like coverd fire,
Consume away in sighs, waste inwardly:
It were a better death than die with mocks,
Which is as bad as die with tickling.
Yet tell her of it: hear what she will say.
No; rather I will go to Benedick
And counsel him to fight against his passion.
And, truly, Ill devise some honest slanders
To stain my cousin with: one doth not know
How much an ill word may empoison liking.
O, do not do your cousin such a wrong.
She cannot be so much without true judgment--
Having so swift and excellent a wit
As she is prized to have--as to refuse
So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick.
He is the only man of Italy.
Always excepted my dear Claudio.
I pray you, be not angry with me, madam,
Speaking my fancy: Signior Benedick,
For shape, for bearing, argument and valour,
Goes foremost in report through Italy.
Indeed, he hath an excellent good name.
His excellence did earn it, ere he had it.
When are you married, madam?
Why, every day, to-morrow. Come, go in:
Ill show thee some attires, and have thy counsel
Which is the best to furnish me to-morrow.
Shes limed, I warrant you: we have caught her, madam.
If it proves so, then loving goes by haps:
Some Cupid kills with arrows, some with traps.
Exeunt HERO and URSULA
[Coming forward]
What fire is in mine ears? Can this be true?
Stand I condemnd for pride and scorn so much?
Contempt, farewell! and maiden pride, adieu!
No glory lives behind the back of such.
And, Benedick, love on; I will requite thee,
Taming my wild heart to thy loving hand:
If thou dost love, my kindness shall incite thee
To bind our loves up in a holy band;
For others say thou dost deserve, and I
Believe it better than reportingly.
Exit
SCENE II. A room in LEONATOS house
Enter DON PEDRO, CLAUDIO, BENEDICK, and LEONATO
I do but stay till your marriage be consummate, and
then go I toward Arragon.
Ill bring you thither, my lord, if youll
vouchsafe me.
Nay, that would be as great a soil in the new gloss
of your marriage as to show a child his new coat
and forbid him to wear it. I will only be bold
with Benedick for his company; for, from the crown
of his head to the sole of his foot, he is all
mirth: he hath twice or thrice cut Cupids
bow-string and the little hangman dare not shoot at
him; he hath a heart as sound as a bell and his
tongue is the clapper, for what his heart thinks his
tongue speaks.
Gallants, I am not as I have been.
So say Imethinks you are sadder.
I hope he be in love.
Hang him, truant! theres no true drop of blood in
him, to be truly touched with love: if he be sad,
he wants money.
I have the toothache.
Draw it.
Hang it!
You must hang it first, and draw it afterwards.
What! sigh for the toothache?
Where is but a humour or a worm.
Well, every one can master a grief but he that has
it.
Yet say I, he is in love.
There is no appearance of fancy in him, unless it be
a fancy that he hath to strange disguises; as, to be
a Dutchman today, a Frenchman to-morrow, or in the
shape of two countries at once, as, a German from
the waist downward, all slops, and a Spaniard from
the hip upward, no doublet. Unless he have a fancy
to this foolery, as it appears he hath, he is no
fool for fancy, as you would have it appear he is.
If he be not in love with some woman, there is no
believing old signs: a brushes his hat o
mornings; what should that bode?
Hath any man seen him at the barbers?
No, but the barbers man hath been seen with him,
and the old ornament of his cheek hath already
stuffed tennis-balls.
Indeed, he looks younger than he did, by the loss of a beard.
Nay, a rubs himself with civet: can you smell him
out by that?
Thats as much as to say, the sweet youths in love.
The greatest note of it is his melancholy.
And when was he wont to wash his face?
Yea, or to paint himself? for the which, I hear
what they say of him.
Nay, but his jesting spirit; which is now crept into
a lute-string and now governed by stops.
Indeed, that tells a heavy tale for him: conclude,
conclude he is in love.
Nay, but I know who loves him.
That would I know too: I warrant, one that knows him not.
Yes, and his ill conditions; and, in despite of
all, dies for him.
She shall be buried with her face upwards.
Yet is this no charm for the toothache. Old
signior, walk aside with me: I have studied eight
or nine wise words to speak to you, which these
hobby-horses must not hear.
Exeunt BENEDICK and LEONATO
For my life, to break with him about Beatrice.
Tis even so. Hero and Margaret have by this
played their parts with Beatrice; and then the two
bears will not bite one another when they meet.
Enter DON JOHN
My lord and brother, God save you!
Good den, brother.
If your leisure served, I would speak with you.
In private?
If it please you: yet Count Claudio may hear; for
what I would speak of concerns him.
Whats the matter?
[To CLAUDIO]  Means your lordship to be married
to-morrow?
You know he does.
I know not that, when he knows what I know.
If there be any impediment, I pray you discover it.
You may think I love you not: let that appear
hereafter, and aim better at me by that I now will
manifest. For my brother, I think he holds you
well, and in dearness of heart hath holp to effect
your ensuing marriage;--surely suit ill spent and
labour ill bestowed.
Why, whats the matter?
I came hither to tell you; and, circumstances
shortened, for she has been too long a talking of,
the lady is disloyal.
Who, Hero?
Even she; Leonatos Hero, your Hero, every mans Hero:
Disloyal?
The word is too good to paint out her wickedness; I
could say she were worse: think you of a worse
title, and I will fit her to it. Wonder not till
further warrant: go but with me to-night, you shall
see her chamber-window entered, even the night
before her wedding-day: if you love her then,
to-morrow wed her; but it would better fit your honour
to change your mind.
May this be so?
I will not think it.
If you dare not trust that you see, confess not
that you know: if you will follow me, I will show
you enough; and when you have seen more and heard
more, proceed accordingly.
If I see any thing to-night why I should not marry
her to-morrow in the congregation, where I should
wed, there will I shame her.
And, as I wooed for thee to obtain her, I will join
with thee to disgrace her.
I will disparage her no farther till you are my
witnesses: bear it coldly but till midnight, and
let the issue show itself.
O day untowardly turned!
O mischief strangely thwarting!
O plague right well prevented! so will you say when
you have seen the sequel.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A street.
Enter DOGBERRY and VERGES with the Watch
Are you good men and true?
Yea, or else it were pity but they should suffer
salvation, body and soul.
Nay, that were a punishment too good for them, if
they should have any allegiance in them, being
chosen for the princes watch.
Well, give them their charge, neighbour Dogberry.
First, who think you the most desertless man to be
constable?
Hugh Otecake, sir, or George Seacole; for they can
write and read.
Come hither, neighbour Seacole. God hath blessed
you with a good name: to be a well-favoured man is
the gift of fortune; but to write and read comes by nature.
Both which, master constable,--
You have: I knew it would be your answer. Well,
for your favour, sir, why, give God thanks, and make
no boast of it; and for your writing and reading,
let that appear when there is no need of such
vanity. You are thought here to be the most
senseless and fit man for the constable of the
watch; therefore bear you the lantern. This is your
charge: you shall comprehend all vagrom men; you are
to bid any man stand, in the princes name.
How if a will not stand?
Why, then, take no note of him, but let him go; and
presently call the rest of the watch together and
thank God you are rid of a knave.
If he will not stand when he is bidden, he is none
of the princes subjects.
True, and they are to meddle with none but the
princes subjects. You shall also make no noise in
the streets; for, for the watch to babble and to
talk is most tolerable and not to be endured.
We will rather sleep than talk: we know what
belongs to a watch.
Why, you speak like an ancient and most quiet
watchman; for I cannot see how sleeping should
offend: only, have a care that your bills be not
stolen. Well, you are to call at all the
ale-houses, and bid those that are drunk get them to bed.
How if they will not?
Why, then, let them alone till they are sober: if
they make you not then the better answer, you may
say they are not the men you took them for.
Well, sir.
If you meet a thief, you may suspect him, by virtue
of your office, to be no true man; and, for such
kind of men, the less you meddle or make with them,
why the more is for your honesty.
If we know him to be a thief, shall we not lay
hands on him?
Truly, by your office, you may; but I think they
that touch pitch will be defiled: the most peaceable
way for you, if you do take a thief, is to let him
show himself what he is and steal out of your company.
You have been always called a merciful man, partner.
Truly, I would not hang a dog by my will, much more
a man who hath any honesty in him.
If you hear a child cry in the night, you must call
to the nurse and bid her still it.
How if the nurse be asleep and will not hear us?
Why, then, depart in peace, and let the child wake
her with crying; for the ewe that will not hear her
lamb when it baes will never answer a calf when he bleats.
Tis very true.
This is the end of the charge:--you, constable, are
to present the princes own person: if you meet the
prince in the night, you may stay him.
Nay, byr our lady, that I think a cannot.
Five shillings to one ont, with any man that knows
the statutes, he may stay him: marry, not without
the prince be willing; for, indeed, the watch ought
to offend no man; and it is an offence to stay a
man against his will.
Byr lady, I think it be so.
Ha, ha, ha! Well, masters, good night: an there be
any matter of weight chances, call up me: keep your
fellows counsels and your own; and good night.
Come, neighbour.
Well, masters, we hear our charge: let us go sit here
upon the church-bench till two, and then all to bed.
One word more, honest neighbours. I pray you watch
about Signior Leonatos door; for the wedding being
there to-morrow, there is a great coil to-night.
Adieu: be vigitant, I beseech you.
Exeunt DOGBERRY and VERGES
Enter BORACHIO and CONRADE
What Conrade!
[Aside]  Peace! stir not.
Conrade, I say!
Here, man; I am at thy elbow.
Mass, and my elbow itched; I thought there would a
scab follow.
I will owe thee an answer for that: and now forward
with thy tale.
Stand thee close, then, under this pent-house, for
it drizzles rain; and I will, like a true drunkard,
utter all to thee.
[Aside]  Some treason, masters: yet stand close.
Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats.
Is it possible that any villany should be so dear?
Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any
villany should be so rich; for when rich villains
have need of poor ones, poor ones may make what
price they will.
I wonder at it.
That shows thou art unconfirmed. Thou knowest that
the fashion of a doublet, or a hat, or a cloak, is
nothing to a man.
Yes, it is apparel.
I mean, the fashion.
Yes, the fashion is the fashion.
Tush! I may as well say the fools the fool. But
seest thou not what a deformed thief this fashion
is?
[Aside]  I know that Deformed; a has been a vile
thief this seven year; a goes up and down like a
gentleman: I remember his name.
Didst thou not hear somebody?
No; twas the vane on the house.
Seest thou not, I say, what a deformed thief this
fashion is? how giddily a turns about all the hot
bloods between fourteen and five-and-thirty?
sometimes fashioning them like Pharaohs soldiers
in the reeky painting, sometime like god Bels
priests in the old church-window, sometime like the
shaven Hercules in the smirched worm-eaten tapestry,
where his codpiece seems as massy as his club?
All this I see; and I see that the fashion wears
out more apparel than the man. But art not thou
thyself giddy with the fashion too, that thou hast
shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion?
Not so, neither: but know that I have to-night
wooed Margaret, the Lady Heros gentlewoman, by the
name of Hero: she leans me out at her mistress
chamber-window, bids me a thousand times good
night,--I tell this tale vilely:--I should first
tell thee how the prince, Claudio and my master,
planted and placed and possessed by my master Don
John, saw afar off in the orchard this amiable encounter.
And thought they Margaret was Hero?
Two of them did, the prince and Claudio; but the
devil my master knew she was Margaret; and partly
by his oaths, which first possessed them, partly by
the dark night, which did deceive them, but chiefly
by my villany, which did confirm any slander that
Don John had made, away went Claudio enraged; swore
he would meet her, as he was appointed, next morning
at the temple, and there, before the whole
congregation, shame her with what he saw oer night
and send her home again without a husband.
We charge you, in the princes name, stand!
Call up the right master constable. We have here
recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that
ever was known in the commonwealth.
And one Deformed is one of them: I know him; a
wears a lock.
Masters, masters,--
Youll be made bring Deformed forth, I warrant you.
Masters,--
Never speak: we charge you let us obey you to go with us.
We are like to prove a goodly commodity, being taken
up of these mens bills.
A commodity in question, I warrant you. Come, well obey you.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. HEROs apartment.
Enter HERO, MARGARET, and URSULA
Good Ursula, wake my cousin Beatrice, and desire
her to rise.
I will, lady.
And bid her come hither.
Well.
Exit
Troth, I think your other rabato were better.
No, pray thee, good Meg, Ill wear this.
By my troth, s not so good; and I warrant your
cousin will say so.
My cousins a fool, and thou art another: Ill wear
none but this.
I like the new tire within excellently, if the hair
were a thought browner; and your gowns a most rare
fashion, i faith. I saw the Duchess of Milans
gown that they praise so.
O, that exceeds, they say.
By my troth, s but a night-gown in respect of
yours: cloth o gold, and cuts, and laced with
silver, set with pearls, down sleeves, side sleeves,
and skirts, round underborne with a bluish tinsel:
but for a fine, quaint, graceful and excellent
fashion, yours is worth ten on t.
God give me joy to wear it! for my heart is
exceeding heavy.
Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man.
Fie upon thee! art not ashamed?
Of what, lady? of speaking honourably? Is not
marriage honourable in a beggar? Is not your lord
honourable without marriage? I think you would have
me say, saving your reverence, a husband: and bad
thinking do not wrest true speaking, Ill offend
nobody: is there any harm in the heavier for a
husband? None, I think, and it be the right husband
and the right wife; otherwise tis light, and not
heavy: ask my Lady Beatrice else; here she comes.
Enter BEATRICE
Good morrow, coz.
Good morrow, sweet Hero.
Why how now? do you speak in the sick tune?
I am out of all other tune, methinks.
Claps into Light o love; that goes without a
burden: do you sing it, and Ill dance it.
Ye light o love, with your heels! then, if your
husband have stables enough, youll see he shall
lack no barns.
O illegitimate construction! I scorn that with my heels.
Tis almost five oclock, cousin; tis time you were
ready. By my troth, I am exceeding ill: heigh-ho!
For a hawk, a horse, or a husband?
For the letter that begins them all, H.
Well, and you be not turned Turk, theres no more
sailing by the star.
What means the fool, trow?
Nothing I; but God send every one their hearts desire!
These gloves the count sent me; they are an
excellent perfume.
I am stuffed, cousin; I cannot smell.
A maid, and stuffed! theres goodly catching of cold.
O, God help me! God help me! how long have you
professed apprehension?
Even since you left it. Doth not my wit become me rarely?
It is not seen enough, you should wear it in your
cap. By my troth, I am sick.
Get you some of this distilled Carduus Benedictus,
and lay it to your heart: it is the only thing for a qualm.
There thou prickest her with a thistle.
Benedictus! why Benedictus? you have some moral in
this Benedictus.
Moral! no, by my troth, I have no moral meaning; I
meant, plain holy-thistle. You may think perchance
that I think you are in love: nay, byr lady, I am
not such a fool to think what I list, nor I list
not to think what I can, nor indeed I cannot think,
if I would think my heart out of thinking, that you
are in love or that you will be in love or that you
can be in love. Yet Benedick was such another, and
now is he become a man: he swore he would never
marry, and yet now, in despite of his heart, he eats
his meat without grudging: and how you may be
converted I know not, but methinks you look with
your eyes as other women do.
What pace is this that thy tongue keeps?
Not a false gallop.
Re-enter URSULA
Madam, withdraw: the prince, the count, Signior
Benedick, Don John, and all the gallants of the
town, are come to fetch you to church.
Help to dress me, good coz, good Meg, good Ursula.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Another room in LEONATOS house.
Enter LEONATO, with DOGBERRY and VERGES
What would you with me, honest neighbour?
Marry, sir, I would have some confidence with you
that decerns you nearly.
Brief, I pray you; for you see it is a busy time with me.
Marry, this it is, sir.
Yes, in truth it is, sir.
What is it, my good friends?
Goodman Verges, sir, speaks a little off the
matter: an old man, sir, and his wits are not so
blunt as, God help, I would desire they were; but,
in faith, honest as the skin between his brows.
Yes, I thank God I am as honest as any man living
that is an old man and no honester than I.
Comparisons are odorous: palabras, neighbour Verges.
Neighbours, you are tedious.
It pleases your worship to say so, but we are the
poor dukes officers; but truly, for mine own part,
if I were as tedious as a king, I could find it in
my heart to bestow it all of your worship.
All thy tediousness on me, ah?
Yea, an twere a thousand pound more than tis; for
I hear as good exclamation on your worship as of any
man in the city; and though I be but a poor man, I
am glad to hear it.
And so am I.
I would fain know what you have to say.
Marry, sir, our watch to-night, excepting your
worships presence, ha taen a couple of as arrant
knaves as any in Messina.
A good old man, sir; he will be talking: as they
say, when the age is in, the wit is out: God help
us! it is a world to see. Well said, i faith,
neighbour Verges: well, Gods a good man; an two men
ride of a horse, one must ride behind. An honest
soul, i faith, sir; by my troth he is, as ever
broke bread; but God is to be worshipped; all men
are not alike; alas, good neighbour!
Indeed, neighbour, he comes too short of you.
Gifts that God gives.
I must leave you.
One word, sir: our watch, sir, have indeed
comprehended two aspicious persons, and we would
have them this morning examined before your worship.
Take their examination yourself and bring it me: I
am now in great haste, as it may appear unto you.
It shall be suffigance.
Drink some wine ere you go: fare you well.
Enter a Messenger
My lord, they stay for you to give your daughter to
her husband.
Ill wait upon them: I am ready.
Exeunt LEONATO and Messenger
Go, good partner, go, get you to Francis Seacole;
bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the gaol: we
are now to examination these men.
And we must do it wisely.
We will spare for no wit, I warrant you; heres
that shall drive some of them to a non-come: only
get the learned writer to set down our
excommunication and meet me at the gaol.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. A church.
Enter DON PEDRO, DON JOHN, LEONATO, FRIAR FRANCIS, CLAUDIO, BENEDICK, HERO, BEATRICE, and Attendants
Come, Friar Francis, be brief; only to the plain
form of marriage, and you shall recount their
particular duties afterwards.
You come hither, my lord, to marry this lady.
No.
To be married to her: friar, you come to marry her.
Lady, you come hither to be married to this count.
I do.
If either of you know any inward impediment why you
should not be conjoined, charge you, on your souls,
to utter it.
Know you any, Hero?
None, my lord.
Know you any, count?
I dare make his answer, none.
O, what men dare do! what men may do! what men daily
do, not knowing what they do!
How now! interjections? Why, then, some be of
laughing, as, ah, ha, he!
Stand thee by, friar. Father, by your leave:
Will you with free and unconstrained soul
Give me this maid, your daughter?
As freely, son, as God did give her me.
And what have I to give you back, whose worth
May counterpoise this rich and precious gift?
Nothing, unless you render her again.
Sweet prince, you learn me noble thankfulness.
There, Leonato, take her back again:
Give not this rotten orange to your friend;
Shes but the sign and semblance of her honour.
Behold how like a maid she blushes here!
O, what authority and show of truth
Can cunning sin cover itself withal!
Comes not that blood as modest evidence
To witness simple virtue? Would you not swear,
All you that see her, that she were a maid,
By these exterior shows? But she is none:
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed;
Her blush is guiltiness, not modesty.
What do you mean, my lord?
Not to be married,
Not to knit my soul to an approved wanton.
Dear my lord, if you, in your own proof,
Have vanquishd the resistance of her youth,
And made defeat of her virginity,--
I know what you would say: if I have known her,
You will say she did embrace me as a husband,
