And so extenuate the forehand sin:
No, Leonato,
I never tempted her with word too large;
But, as a brother to his sister, showd
Bashful sincerity and comely love.
And seemd I ever otherwise to you?
Out on thee! Seeming! I will write against it:
You seem to me as Dian in her orb,
As chaste as is the bud ere it be blown;
But you are more intemperate in your blood
Than Venus, or those pamperd animals
That rage in savage sensuality.
Is my lord well, that he doth speak so wide?
Sweet prince, why speak not you?
What should I speak?
I stand dishonourd, that have gone about
To link my dear friend to a common stale.
Are these things spoken, or do I but dream?
Sir, they are spoken, and these things are true.
This looks not like a nuptial.
True! O God!
Leonato, stand I here?
Is this the prince? is this the princes brother?
Is this face Heros? are our eyes our own?
All this is so: but what of this, my lord?
Let me but move one question to your daughter;
And, by that fatherly and kindly power
That you have in her, bid her answer truly.
I charge thee do so, as thou art my child.
O, God defend me! how am I beset!
What kind of catechising call you this?
To make you answer truly to your name.
Is it not Hero? Who can blot that name
With any just reproach?
Marry, that can Hero;
Hero itself can blot out Heros virtue.
What man was he talkd with you yesternight
Out at your window betwixt twelve and one?
Now, if you are a maid, answer to this.
I talkd with no man at that hour, my lord.
Why, then are you no maiden. Leonato,
I am sorry you must hear: upon mine honour,
Myself, my brother and this grieved count
Did see her, hear her, at that hour last night
Talk with a ruffian at her chamber-window
Who hath indeed, most like a liberal villain,
Confessd the vile encounters they have had
A thousand times in secret.
Fie, fie! they are not to be named, my lord,
Not to be spoke of;
There is not chastity enough in language
Without offence to utter them. Thus, pretty lady,
I am sorry for thy much misgovernment.
O Hero, what a Hero hadst thou been,
If half thy outward graces had been placed
About thy thoughts and counsels of thy heart!
But fare thee well, most foul, most fair! farewell,
Thou pure impiety and impious purity!
For thee Ill lock up all the gates of love,
And on my eyelids shall conjecture hang,
To turn all beauty into thoughts of harm,
And never shall it more be gracious.
Hath no mans dagger here a point for me?
HERO swoons
Why, how now, cousin! wherefore sink you down?
Come, let us go. These things, come thus to light,
Smother her spirits up.
Exeunt DON PEDRO, DON JOHN, and CLAUDIO
How doth the lady?
Dead, I think. Help, uncle!
Hero! why, Hero! Uncle! Signior Benedick! Friar!
O Fate! take not away thy heavy hand.
Death is the fairest cover for her shame
That may be wishd for.
How now, cousin Hero!
Have comfort, lady.
Dost thou look up?
Yea, wherefore should she not?
Wherefore! Why, doth not every earthly thing
Cry shame upon her? Could she here deny
The story that is printed in her blood?
Do not live, Hero; do not ope thine eyes:
For, did I think thou wouldst not quickly die,
Thought I thy spirits were stronger than thy shames,
Myself would, on the rearward of reproaches,
Strike at thy life. Grieved I, I had but one?
Chid I for that at frugal natures frame?
O, one too much by thee! Why had I one?
Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes?
Why had I not with charitable hand
Took up a beggars issue at my gates,
Who smirchd thus and mired with infamy,
I might have said No part of it is mine;
This shame derives itself from unknown loins?
But mine and mine I loved and mine I praised
And mine that I was proud on, mine so much
That I myself was to myself not mine,
Valuing of her,--why, she, O, she is fallen
Into a pit of ink, that the wide sea
Hath drops too few to wash her clean again
And salt too little which may season give
To her foul-tainted flesh!
Sir, sir, be patient.
For my part, I am so attired in wonder,
I know not what to say.
O, on my soul, my cousin is belied!
Lady, were you her bedfellow last night?
No, truly not; although, until last night,
I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow.
Confirmd, confirmd! O, that is stronger made
Which was before barrd up with ribs of iron!
Would the two princes lie, and Claudio lie,
Who loved her so, that, speaking of her foulness,
Washd it with tears? Hence from her! let her die.
Hear me a little;
For I have only been silent so long
And given way unto this course of fortune.
...
By noting of the lady I have markd
A thousand blushing apparitions
To start into her face, a thousand innocent shames
In angel whiteness beat away those blushes;
And in her eye there hath appeard a fire,
To burn the errors that these princes hold
Against her maiden truth. Call me a fool;
Trust not my reading nor my observations,
Which with experimental seal doth warrant
The tenor of my book; trust not my age,
My reverence, calling, nor divinity,
If this sweet lady lie not guiltless here
Under some biting error.
Friar, it cannot be.
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left
Is that she will not add to her damnation
A sin of perjury; she not denies it:
Why seekst thou then to cover with excuse
That which appears in proper nakedness?
Lady, what man is he you are accused of?
They know that do accuse me; I know none:
If I know more of any man alive
Than that which maiden modesty doth warrant,
Let all my sins lack mercy! O my father,
Prove you that any man with me conversed
At hours unmeet, or that I yesternight
Maintaind the change of words with any creature,
Refuse me, hate me, torture me to death!
There is some strange misprision in the princes.
Two of them have the very bent of honour;
And if their wisdoms be misled in this,
The practise of it lives in John the bastard,
Whose spirits toil in frame of villanies.
I know not. If they speak but truth of her,
These hands shall tear her; if they wrong her honour,
The proudest of them shall well hear of it.
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine,
Nor age so eat up my invention,
Nor fortune made such havoc of my means,
Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends,
But they shall find, awaked in such a kind,
Both strength of limb and policy of mind,
Ability in means and choice of friends,
To quit me of them throughly.
Pause awhile,
And let my counsel sway you in this case.
Your daughter here the princes left for dead:
Let her awhile be secretly kept in,
And publish it that she is dead indeed;
Maintain a mourning ostentation
And on your familys old monument
Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites
That appertain unto a burial.
What shall become of this? what will this do?
Marry, this well carried shall on her behalf
Change slander to remorse; that is some good:
But not for that dream I on this strange course,
But on this travail look for greater birth.
She dying, as it must so be maintaind,
Upon the instant that she was accused,
Shall be lamented, pitied and excused
Of every hearer: for it so falls out
That what we have we prize not to the worth
Whiles we enjoy it, but being lackd and lost,
Why, then we rack the value, then we find
The virtue that possession would not show us
Whiles it was ours. So will it fare with Claudio:
When he shall hear she died upon his words,
The idea of her life shall sweetly creep
Into his study of imagination,
And every lovely organ of her life
Shall come apparelld in more precious habit,
More moving-delicate and full of life,
Into the eye and prospect of his soul,
Than when she lived indeed; then shall he mourn,
If ever love had interest in his liver,
And wish he had not so accused her,
No, though he thought his accusation true.
Let this be so, and doubt not but success
Will fashion the event in better shape
Than I can lay it down in likelihood.
But if all aim but this be levelld false,
The supposition of the ladys death
Will quench the wonder of her infamy:
And if it sort not well, you may conceal her,
As best befits her wounded reputation,
In some reclusive and religious life,
Out of all eyes, tongues, minds and injuries.
Signior Leonato, let the friar advise you:
And though you know my inwardness and love
Is very much unto the prince and Claudio,
Yet, by mine honour, I will deal in this
As secretly and justly as your soul
Should with your body.
Being that I flow in grief,
The smallest twine may lead me.
Tis well consented: presently away;
For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure.
Come, lady, die to live: this wedding-day
Perhaps is but prolongd: have patience and endure.
Exeunt all but BENEDICK and BEATRICE
Lady Beatrice, have you wept all this while?
Yea, and I will weep a while longer.
I will not desire that.
You have no reason; I do it freely.
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged.
Ah, how much might the man deserve of me that would right her!
Is there any way to show such friendship?
A very even way, but no such friend.
May a man do it?
It is a mans office, but not yours.
I do love nothing in the world so well as you: is
not that strange?
As strange as the thing I know not. It were as
possible for me to say I loved nothing so well as
you: but believe me not; and yet I lie not; I
confess nothing, nor I deny nothing. I am sorry for my cousin.
By my sword, Beatrice, thou lovest me.
Do not swear, and eat it.
I will swear by it that you love me; and I will make
him eat it that says I love not you.
Will you not eat your word?
With no sauce that can be devised to it. I protest
I love thee.
Why, then, God forgive me!
What offence, sweet Beatrice?
You have stayed me in a happy hour: I was about to
protest I loved you.
And do it with all thy heart.
I love you with so much of my heart that none is
left to protest.
Come, bid me do any thing for thee.
Kill Claudio.
Ha! not for the wide world.
You kill me to deny it. Farewell.
Tarry, sweet Beatrice.
I am gone, though I am here: there is no love in
you: nay, I pray you, let me go.
Beatrice,--
In faith, I will go.
Well be friends first.
You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy.
Is Claudio thine enemy?
Is he not approved in the height a villain, that
hath slandered, scorned, dishonoured my kinswoman? O
that I were a man! What, bear her in hand until they
come to take hands; and then, with public
accusation, uncovered slander, unmitigated rancour,
--O God, that I were a man! I would eat his heart
in the market-place.
Hear me, Beatrice,--
Talk with a man out at a window! A proper saying!
Nay, but, Beatrice,--
Sweet Hero! She is wronged, she is slandered, she is undone.
Beat--
Princes and counties! Surely, a princely testimony,
a goodly count, Count Comfect; a sweet gallant,
surely! O that I were a man for his sake! or that I
had any friend would be a man for my sake! But
manhood is melted into courtesies, valour into
compliment, and men are only turned into tongue, and
trim ones too: he is now as valiant as Hercules
that only tells a lie and swears it. I cannot be a
man with wishing, therefore I will die a woman with grieving.
Tarry, good Beatrice. By this hand, I love thee.
Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it.
Think you in your soul the Count Claudio hath wronged Hero?
Yea, as sure as I have a thought or a soul.
Enough, I am engaged; I will challenge him. I will
kiss your hand, and so I leave you. By this hand,
Claudio shall render me a dear account. As you
hear of me, so think of me. Go, comfort your
cousin: I must say she is dead: and so, farewell.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A prison.
Enter DOGBERRY, VERGES, and Sexton, in gowns; and the Watch, with CONRADE and BORACHIO
Is our whole dissembly appeared?
O, a stool and a cushion for the sexton.
Which be the malefactors?
Marry, that am I and my partner.
Nay, thats certain; we have the exhibition to examine.
But which are the offenders that are to be
examined? let them come before master constable.
Yea, marry, let them come before me. What is your
name, friend?
Borachio.
Pray, write down, Borachio. Yours, sirrah?
I am a gentleman, sir, and my name is Conrade.
Write down, master gentleman Conrade. Masters, do
you serve God?
Yea, sir, we hope.
Write down, that they hope they serve God: and
write God first; for God defend but God should go
before such villains! Masters, it is proved already
that you are little better than false knaves; and it
will go near to be thought so shortly. How answer
you for yourselves?
Marry, sir, we say we are none.
A marvellous witty fellow, I assure you: but I
will go about with him. Come you hither, sirrah; a
word in your ear: sir, I say to you, it is thought
you are false knaves.
Sir, I say to you we are none.
Well, stand aside. Fore God, they are both in a
tale. Have you writ down, that they are none?
Master constable, you go not the way to examine:
you must call forth the watch that are their accusers.
Yea, marry, thats the eftest way. Let the watch
come forth. Masters, I charge you, in the princes
name, accuse these men.
This man said, sir, that Don John, the princes
brother, was a villain.
Write down Prince John a villain. Why, this is flat
perjury, to call a princes brother villain.
Master constable,--
Pray thee, fellow, peace: I do not like thy look,
I promise thee.
What heard you him say else?
Marry, that he had received a thousand ducats of
Don John for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully.
Flat burglary as ever was committed.
Yea, by mass, that it is.
What else, fellow?
And that Count Claudio did mean, upon his words, to
disgrace Hero before the whole assembly. and not marry her.
O villain! thou wilt be condemned into everlasting
redemption for this.
What else?
This is all.
And this is more, masters, than you can deny.
Prince John is this morning secretly stolen away;
Hero was in this manner accused, in this very manner
refused, and upon the grief of this suddenly died.
Master constable, let these men be bound, and
brought to Leonatos: I will go before and show
him their examination.
Exit
Come, let them be opinioned.
Let them be in the hands--
Off, coxcomb!
Gods my life, wheres the sexton? let him write
down the princes officer coxcomb. Come, bind them.
Thou naughty varlet!
Away! you are an ass, you are an ass.
Dost thou not suspect my place? dost thou not
suspect my years? O that he were here to write me
down an ass! But, masters, remember that I am an
ass; though it be not written down, yet forget not
that I am an ass. No, thou villain, thou art full of
piety, as shall be proved upon thee by good witness.
I am a wise fellow, and, which is more, an officer,
and, which is more, a householder, and, which is
more, as pretty a piece of flesh as any is in
Messina, and one that knows the law, go to; and a
rich fellow enough, go to; and a fellow that hath
had losses, and one that hath two gowns and every
thing handsome about him. Bring him away. O that
I had been writ down an ass!
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Before LEONATOS house.
Enter LEONATO and ANTONIO
If you go on thus, you will kill yourself:
And tis not wisdom thus to second grief
Against yourself.
I pray thee, cease thy counsel,
Which falls into mine ears as profitless
As water in a sieve: give not me counsel;
Nor let no comforter delight mine ear
But such a one whose wrongs do suit with mine.
Bring me a father that so loved his child,
Whose joy of her is overwhelmd like mine,
And bid him speak of patience;
Measure his woe the length and breadth of mine
And let it answer every strain for strain,
As thus for thus and such a grief for such,
In every lineament, branch, shape, and form:
If such a one will smile and stroke his beard,
Bid sorrow wag, cry hem! when he should groan,
Patch grief with proverbs, make misfortune drunk
With candle-wasters; bring him yet to me,
And I of him will gather patience.
But there is no such man: for, brother, men
Can counsel and speak comfort to that grief
Which they themselves not feel; but, tasting it,
Their counsel turns to passion, which before
Would give preceptial medicine to rage,
Fetter strong madness in a silken thread,
Charm ache with air and agony with words:
No, no; tis all mens office to speak patience
To those that wring under the load of sorrow,
But no mans virtue nor sufficiency
To be so moral when he shall endure
The like himself. Therefore give me no counsel:
My griefs cry louder than advertisement.
Therein do men from children nothing differ.
I pray thee, peace. I will be flesh and blood;
For there was never yet philosopher
That could endure the toothache patiently,
However they have writ the style of gods
And made a push at chance and sufferance.
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself;
Make those that do offend you suffer too.
There thou speakst reason: nay, I will do so.
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied;
And that shall Claudio know; so shall the prince
And all of them that thus dishonour her.
Here comes the prince and Claudio hastily.
Enter DON PEDRO and CLAUDIO
Good den, good den.
Good day to both of you.
Hear you. my lords,--
We have some haste, Leonato.
Some haste, my lord! well, fare you well, my lord:
Are you so hasty now? well, all is one.
Nay, do not quarrel with us, good old man.
If he could right himself with quarreling,
Some of us would lie low.
Who wrongs him?
Marry, thou dost wrong me; thou dissembler, thou:--
Nay, never lay thy hand upon thy sword;
I fear thee not.
Marry, beshrew my hand,
If it should give your age such cause of fear:
In faith, my hand meant nothing to my sword.
Tush, tush, man; never fleer and jest at me:
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool,
As under privilege of age to brag
What I have done being young, or what would do
Were I not old. Know, Claudio, to thy head,
Thou hast so wrongd mine innocent child and me
That I am forced to lay my reverence by
And, with grey hairs and bruise of many days,
Do challenge thee to trial of a man.
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child;
Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart,
And she lies buried with her ancestors;
O, in a tomb where never scandal slept,
Save this of hers, framed by thy villany!
My villany?
Thine, Claudio; thine, I say.
You say not right, old man.
My lord, my lord,
Ill prove it on his body, if he dare,
Despite his nice fence and his active practise,
His May of youth and bloom of lustihood.
Away! I will not have to do with you.
Canst thou so daff me? Thou hast killd my child:
If thou killst me, boy, thou shalt kill a man.
He shall kill two of us, and men indeed:
But thats no matter; let him kill one first;
Win me and wear me; let him answer me.
Come, follow me, boy; come, sir boy, come, follow me:
Sir boy, Ill whip you from your foining fence;
Nay, as I am a gentleman, I will.
Brother,--
Content yourself. God knows I loved my niece;
And she is dead, slanderd to death by villains,
That dare as well answer a man indeed
As I dare take a serpent by the tongue:
Boys, apes, braggarts, Jacks, milksops!
Brother Antony,--
Hold you content. What, man! I know them, yea,
And what they weigh, even to the utmost scruple,--
Scrambling, out-facing, fashion-monging boys,
That lie and cog and flout, deprave and slander,
Go anticly, show outward hideousness,
And speak off half a dozen dangerous words,
How they might hurt their enemies, if they durst;
And this is all.
But, brother Antony,--
Come, tis no matter:
Do not you meddle; let me deal in this.
Gentlemen both, we will not wake your patience.
My heart is sorry for your daughters death:
But, on my honour, she was charged with nothing
But what was true and very full of proof.
My lord, my lord,--
I will not hear you.
No? Come, brother; away! I will be heard.
And shall, or some of us will smart for it.
Exeunt LEONATO and ANTONIO
See, see; here comes the man we went to seek.
Enter BENEDICK
Now, signior, what news?
Good day, my lord.
Welcome, signior: you are almost come to part
almost a fray.
We had like to have had our two noses snapped off
with two old men without teeth.
Leonato and his brother. What thinkest thou? Had
we fought, I doubt we should have been too young for them.
In a false quarrel there is no true valour. I came
to seek you both.
We have been up and down to seek thee; for we are
high-proof melancholy and would fain have it beaten
away. Wilt thou use thy wit?
It is in my scabbard: shall I draw it?
Dost thou wear thy wit by thy side?
Never any did so, though very many have been beside
their wit. I will bid thee draw, as we do the
minstrels; draw, to pleasure us.
As I am an honest man, he looks pale. Art thou
sick, or angry?
What, courage, man! What though care killed a cat,
thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care.
Sir, I shall meet your wit in the career, and you
charge it against me. I pray you choose another subject.
Nay, then, give him another staff: this last was
broke cross.
By this light, he changes more and more: I think
he be angry indeed.
If he be, he knows how to turn his girdle.
Shall I speak a word in your ear?
God bless me from a challenge!
[Aside to CLAUDIO]  You are a villain; I jest not:
I will make it good how you dare, with what you
dare, and when you dare. Do me right, or I will
protest your cowardice. You have killed a sweet
lady, and her death shall fall heavy on you. Let me
hear from you.
Well, I will meet you, so I may have good cheer.
What, a feast, a feast?
I faith, I thank him; he hath bid me to a calfs
head and a capon; the which if I do not carve most
curiously, say my knifes naught. Shall I not find
a woodcock too?
Sir, your wit ambles well; it goes easily.
Ill tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit the
other day. I said, thou hadst a fine wit: True,
said she, a fine little one. No, said I, a
great wit: Right, says she, a great gross one.
Nay, said I, a good wit: Just, said she, it
hurts nobody. Nay, said I, the gentleman
is wise: Certain, said she, a wise gentleman.
Nay, said I, he hath the tongues: That I
believe, said she, for he swore a thing to me on
Monday night, which he forswore on Tuesday morning;
theres a double tongue; theres two tongues. Thus
did she, an hour together, transshape thy particular
virtues: yet at last she concluded with a sigh, thou
wast the properest man in Italy.
For the which she wept heartily and said she cared
not.
Yea, that she did: but yet, for all that, an if she
did not hate him deadly, she would love him dearly:
the old mans daughter told us all.
All, all; and, moreover, God saw him when he was
hid in the garden.
But when shall we set the savage bulls horns on
the sensible Benedicks head?
Yea, and text underneath, Here dwells Benedick the
married man?
Fare you well, boy: you know my mind. I will leave
you now to your gossip-like humour: you break jests
as braggarts do their blades, which God be thanked,
hurt not. My lord, for your many courtesies I thank
you: I must discontinue your company: your brother
the bastard is fled from Messina: you have among
you killed a sweet and innocent lady. For my Lord
Lackbeard there, he and I shall meet: and, till
then, peace be with him.
Exit
He is in earnest.
In most profound earnest; and, Ill warrant you, for
the love of Beatrice.
And hath challenged thee.
Most sincerely.
What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his
doublet and hose and leaves off his wit!
He is then a giant to an ape; but then is an ape a
doctor to such a man.
But, soft you, let me be: pluck up, my heart, and
be sad. Did he not say, my brother was fled?
Enter DOGBERRY, VERGES, and the Watch, with CONRADE and BORACHIO
Come you, sir: if justice cannot tame you, she
shall neer weigh more reasons in her balance: nay,
an you be a cursing hypocrite once, you must be looked to.
How now? two of my brothers men bound! Borachio
one!
Hearken after their offence, my lord.
Officers, what offence have these men done?
Marry, sir, they have committed false report;
moreover, they have spoken untruths; secondarily,
they are slanders; sixth and lastly, they have
belied a lady; thirdly, they have verified unjust
things; and, to conclude, they are lying knaves.
First, I ask thee what they have done; thirdly, I
ask thee whats their offence; sixth and lastly, why
they are committed; and, to conclude, what you lay
to their charge.
Rightly reasoned, and in his own division: and, by
my troth, theres one meaning well suited.
Who have you offended, masters, that you are thus
bound to your answer? this learned constable is
too cunning to be understood: whats your offence?
Sweet prince, let me go no farther to mine answer:
do you hear me, and let this count kill me. I have
deceived even your very eyes: what your wisdoms
could not discover, these shallow fools have brought
to light: who in the night overheard me confessing
to this man how Don John your brother incensed me
to slander the Lady Hero, how you were brought into
the orchard and saw me court Margaret in Heros
garments, how you disgraced her, when you should
marry her: my villany they have upon record; which
I had rather seal with my death than repeat over
to my shame. The lady is dead upon mine and my
masters false accusation; and, briefly, I desire
nothing but the reward of a villain.
Runs not this speech like iron through your blood?
I have drunk poison whiles he utterd it.
But did my brother set thee on to this?
Yea, and paid me richly for the practise of it.
He is composed and framed of treachery:
And fled he is upon this villany.
Sweet Hero! now thy image doth appear
In the rare semblance that I loved it first.
Come, bring away the plaintiffs: by this time our
sexton hath reformed Signior Leonato of the matter:
and, masters, do not forget to specify, when time
and place shall serve, that I am an ass.
Here, here comes master Signior Leonato, and the
Sexton too.
Re-enter LEONATO and ANTONIO, with the Sexton
Which is the villain? let me see his eyes,
That, when I note another man like him,
I may avoid him: which of these is he?
If you would know your wronger, look on me.
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast killd
Mine innocent child?
Yea, even I alone.
No, not so, villain; thou beliest thyself:
Here stand a pair of honourable men;
A third is fled, that had a hand in it.
I thank you, princes, for my daughters death:
Record it with your high and worthy deeds:
Twas bravely done, if you bethink you of it.
I know not how to pray your patience;
Yet I must speak. Choose your revenge yourself;
Impose me to what penance your invention
Can lay upon my sin: yet sinnd I not
But in mistaking.
By my soul, nor I:
And yet, to satisfy this good old man,
I would bend under any heavy weight
That hell enjoin me to.
I cannot bid you bid my daughter live;
That were impossible: but, I pray you both,
Possess the people in Messina here
How innocent she died; and if your love
Can labour ought in sad invention,
Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb
And sing it to her bones, sing it to-night:
To-morrow morning come you to my house,
And since you could not be my son-in-law,
Be yet my nephew: my brother hath a daughter,
Almost the copy of my child thats dead,
And she alone is heir to both of us:
Give her the right you should have given her cousin,
And so dies my revenge.
O noble sir,
Your over-kindness doth wring tears from me!
I do embrace your offer; and dispose
For henceforth of poor Claudio.
To-morrow then I will expect your coming;
To-night I take my leave. This naughty man
Shall face to face be brought to Margaret,
Who I believe was packd in all this wrong,
Hired to it by your brother.
No, by my soul, she was not,
Nor knew not what she did when she spoke to me,
But always hath been just and virtuous
In any thing that I do know by her.
Moreover, sir, which indeed is not under white and
black, this plaintiff here, the offender, did call
me ass: I beseech you, let it be remembered in his
punishment. And also, the watch heard them talk of
one Deformed: they say be wears a key in his ear and
a lock hanging by it, and borrows money in Gods
name, the which he hath used so long and never paid
that now men grow hard-hearted and will lend nothing
for Gods sake: pray you, examine him upon that point.
I thank thee for thy care and honest pains.
Your worship speaks like a most thankful and
reverend youth; and I praise God for you.
Theres for thy pains.
God save the foundation!
Go, I discharge thee of thy prisoner, and I thank thee.
I leave an arrant knave with your worship; which I
beseech your worship to correct yourself, for the
example of others. God keep your worship! I wish
your worship well; God restore you to health! I
humbly give you leave to depart; and if a merry
meeting may be wished, God prohibit it! Come, neighbour.
Exeunt DOGBERRY and VERGES
Until to-morrow morning, lords, farewell.
Farewell, my lords: we look for you to-morrow.
We will not fail.
To-night Ill mourn with Hero.
[To the Watch]  Bring you these fellows on. Well
talk with Margaret,
How her acquaintance grew with this lewd fellow.
Exeunt, severally
SCENE II. LEONATOS garden.
Enter BENEDICK and MARGARET, meeting
Pray thee, sweet Mistress Margaret, deserve well at
my hands by helping me to the speech of Beatrice.
Will you then write me a sonnet in praise of my beauty?
In so high a style, Margaret, that no man living
shall come over it; for, in most comely truth, thou
deservest it.
To have no man come over me! why, shall I always
keep below stairs?
Thy wit is as quick as the greyhounds mouth; it catches.
And yours as blunt as the fencers foils, which hit,
but hurt not.
A most manly wit, Margaret; it will not hurt a
woman: and so, I pray thee, call Beatrice: I give
thee the bucklers.
Give us the swords; we have bucklers of our own.
If you use them, Margaret, you must put in the
pikes with a vice; and they are dangerous weapons for maids.
Well, I will call Beatrice to you, who I think hath legs.
And therefore will come.
Exit MARGARET
Sings
The god of love,
That sits above,
And knows me, and knows me,
How pitiful I deserve,--
I mean in singing; but in loving, Leander the good
swimmer, Troilus the first employer of panders, and
a whole bookful of these quondam carpet-mangers,
whose names yet run smoothly in the even road of a
blank verse, why, they were never so truly turned
over and over as my poor self in love. Marry, I
cannot show it in rhyme; I have tried: I can find
out no rhyme to lady but baby, an innocent
rhyme; for scorn, horn, a hard rhyme; for,
school, fool, a babbling rhyme; very ominous
endings: no, I was not born under a rhyming planet,
nor I cannot woo in festival terms.
Enter BEATRICE
Sweet Beatrice, wouldst thou come when I called thee?
Yea, signior, and depart when you bid me.
O, stay but till then!
Then is spoken; fare you well now: and yet, ere
I go, let me go with that I came; which is, with
knowing what hath passed between you and Claudio.
Only foul words; and thereupon I will kiss thee.
Foul words is but foul wind, and foul wind is but
foul breath, and foul breath is noisome; therefore I
will depart unkissed.
Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense,
so forcible is thy wit. But I must tell thee
plainly, Claudio undergoes my challenge; and either
I must shortly hear from him, or I will subscribe
him a coward. And, I pray thee now, tell me for
which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me?
For them all together; which maintained so politic
a state of evil that they will not admit any good
part to intermingle with them. But for which of my
good parts did you first suffer love for me?
Suffer love! a good epithet! I do suffer love
indeed, for I love thee against my will.
In spite of your heart, I think; alas, poor heart!
If you spite it for my sake, I will spite it for
yours; for I will never love that which my friend hates.
Thou and I are too wise to woo peaceably.
It appears not in this confession: theres not one
wise man among twenty that will praise himself.
An old, an old instance, Beatrice, that lived in
the lime of good neighbours. If a man do not erect
in this age his own tomb ere he dies, he shall live
no longer in monument than the bell rings and the
widow weeps.
And how long is that, think you?
Question: why, an hour in clamour and a quarter in
rheum: therefore is it most expedient for the
wise, if Don Worm, his conscience, find no
impediment to the contrary, to be the trumpet of his
own virtues, as I am to myself. So much for
praising myself, who, I myself will bear witness, is
praiseworthy: and now tell me, how doth your cousin?
Very ill.
And how do you?
Very ill too.
Serve God, love me and mend. There will I leave
you too, for here comes one in haste.
Enter URSULA
Madam, you must come to your uncle. Yonders old
coil at home: it is proved my Lady Hero hath been
falsely accused, the prince and Claudio mightily
abused; and Don John is the author of all, who is
fed and gone. Will you come presently?
Will you go hear this news, signior?
I will live in thy heart, die in thy lap, and be
buried in thy eyes; and moreover I will go with
thee to thy uncles.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A church.
Enter DON PEDRO, CLAUDIO, and three or four with tapers
Is this the monument of Leonato?
It is, my lord.
[Reading out of a scroll]
Done to death by slanderous tongues
Was the Hero that here lies:
Death, in guerdon of her wrongs,
Gives her fame which never dies.
So the life that died with shame
Lives in death with glorious fame.
Hang thou there upon the tomb,
Praising her when I am dumb.
Now, music, sound, and sing your solemn hymn.
SONG.
Pardon, goddess of the night,
Those that slew thy virgin knight;
For the which, with songs of woe,
Round about her tomb they go.
Midnight, assist our moan;
Help us to sigh and groan,
Heavily, heavily:
Graves, yawn and yield your dead,
Till death be uttered,
Heavily, heavily.
Now, unto thy bones good night!
Yearly will I do this rite.
Good morrow, masters; put your torches out:
The wolves have preyd; and look, the gentle day,
Before the wheels of Phoebus, round about
Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey.
Thanks to you all, and leave us: fare you well.
Good morrow, masters: each his several way.
Come, let us hence, and put on other weeds;
And then to Leonatos we will go.
And Hymen now with luckier issue speeds
Than this for whom we renderd up this woe.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. A room in LEONATOS house.
Enter LEONATO, ANTONIO, BENEDICK, BEATRICE, MARGARET, URSULA, FRIAR FRANCIS, and HERO
Did I not tell you she was innocent?
So are the prince and Claudio, who accused her
Upon the error that you heard debated:
But Margaret was in some fault for this,
Although against her will, as it appears
In the true course of all the question.
Well, I am glad that all things sort so well.
And so am I, being else by faith enforced
To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it.
Well, daughter, and you gentle-women all,
Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves,
And when I send for you, come hither maskd.
Exeunt Ladies
The prince and Claudio promised by this hour
To visit me. You know your office, brother:
You must be father to your brothers daughter
And give her to young Claudio.
Which I will do with confirmd countenance.
Friar, I must entreat your pains, I think.
To do what, signior?
To bind me, or undo me; one of them.
Signior Leonato, truth it is, good signior,
Your niece regards me with an eye of favour.
That eye my daughter lent her: tis most true.
And I do with an eye of love requite her.
The sight whereof I think you had from me,
From Claudio and the prince: but whats your will?
Your answer, sir, is enigmatical:
But, for my will, my will is your good will
May stand with ours, this day to be conjoind
In the state of honourable marriage:
In which, good friar, I shall desire your help.
My heart is with your liking.
And my help.
Here comes the prince and Claudio.
Enter DON PEDRO and CLAUDIO, and two or three others
Good morrow to this fair assembly.
Good morrow, prince; good morrow, Claudio:
We here attend you. Are you yet determined
To-day to marry with my brothers daughter?
Ill hold my mind, were she an Ethiope.
Call her forth, brother; heres the friar ready.
Exit ANTONIO
Good morrow, Benedick. Why, whats the matter,
That you have such a February face,
So full of frost, of storm and cloudiness?
I think he thinks upon the savage bull.
Tush, fear not, man; well tip thy horns with gold
And all Europa shall rejoice at thee,
As once Europa did at lusty Jove,
When he would play the noble beast in love.
Bull Jove, sir, had an amiable low;
And some such strange bull leapd your fathers cow,
And got a calf in that same noble feat
Much like to you, for you have just his bleat.
For this I owe you: here comes other reckonings.
Re-enter ANTONIO, with the Ladies masked
Which is the lady I must seize upon?
This same is she, and I do give you her.
Why, then shes mine. Sweet, let me see your face.
No, that you shall not, till you take her hand
Before this friar and swear to marry her.
Give me your hand: before this holy friar,
I am your husband, if you like of me.
And when I lived, I was your other wife:
Unmasking
And when you loved, you were my other husband.
Another Hero!
Nothing certainer:
One Hero died defiled, but I do live,
And surely as I live, I am a maid.
The former Hero! Hero that is dead!
She died, my lord, but whiles her slander lived.
All this amazement can I qualify:
When after that the holy rites are ended,
Ill tell you largely of fair Heros death:
Meantime let wonder seem familiar,
And to the chapel let us presently.
Soft and fair, friar. Which is Beatrice?
[Unmasking]  I answer to that name. What is your will?
Do not you love me?
Why, no; no more than reason.
Why, then your uncle and the prince and Claudio
Have been deceived; they swore you did.
Do not you love me?
Troth, no; no more than reason.
Why, then my cousin Margaret and Ursula
Are much deceived; for they did swear you did.
They swore that you were almost sick for me.
They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me.
Tis no such matter. Then you do not love me?
No, truly, but in friendly recompense.
Come, cousin, I am sure you love the gentleman.
And Ill be sworn upont that he loves her;
For heres a paper written in his hand,
A halting sonnet of his own pure brain,
Fashiond to Beatrice.
And heres another
Writ in my cousins hand, stolen from her pocket,
Containing her affection unto Benedick.
A miracle! heres our own hands against our hearts.
Come, I will have thee; but, by this light, I take
thee for pity.
I would not deny you; but, by this good day, I yield
upon great persuasion; and partly to save your life,
for I was told you were in a consumption.
Peace! I will stop your mouth.
Kissing her
How dost thou, Benedick, the married man?
Ill tell thee what, prince; a college of
wit-crackers cannot flout me out of my humour. Dost
thou think I  care for a satire or an epigram? No:
if a man will be beaten with brains, a shall wear
nothing handsome about him. In brief, since I do
purpose to marry, I will think nothing to any
purpose that the world can say against it; and
therefore never flout at me for what I have said
against it; for man is a giddy thing, and this is my
conclusion. For thy part, Claudio, I did think to
have beaten thee, but in that thou art like to be my
kinsman, live unbruised and love my cousin.
I had well hoped thou wouldst have denied Beatrice,
that I might have cudgelled thee out of thy single
life, to make thee a double-dealer; which, out of
question, thou wilt be, if my cousin do not look
exceedingly narrowly to thee.
Come, come, we are friends: lets have a dance ere
we are married, that we may lighten our own hearts
and our wives heels.
Well have dancing afterward.
First, of my word; therefore play, music. Prince,
thou art sad; get thee a wife, get thee a wife:
there is no staff more reverend than one tipped with horn.
Enter a Messenger
My lord, your brother John is taen in flight,
And brought with armed men back to Messina.
Think not on him till to-morrow:
Ill devise thee brave punishments for him.
Strike up, pipers.
Dance
Exeunt
