But Ill set down the pegs that make this music,
As honest as I am.
Come, let us to the castle.
News, friends; our wars are done, the Turks
are drownd.
How does my old acquaintance of this isle?
Honey, you shall be well desired in Cyprus;
I have found great love amongst them. O my sweet,
I prattle out of fashion, and I dote
In mine own comforts. I prithee, good Iago,
Go to the bay and disembark my coffers:
Bring thou the master to the citadel;
He is a good one, and his worthiness
Does challenge much respect. Come, Desdemona,
Once more, well met at Cyprus.
Exeunt OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, and Attendants
Do thou meet me presently at the harbour. Come
hither. If thou best valiant,-- as, they say, base
men being in love have then a nobility in their
natures more than is native to them--list me. The
lieutenant tonight watches on the court of
guard:--first, I must tell thee this--Desdemona is
directly in love with him.
With him! why, tis not possible.
Lay thy finger thus, and let thy soul be instructed.
Mark me with what violence she first loved the Moor,
but for bragging and telling her fantastical lies:
and will she love him still for prating? let not
thy discreet heart think it. Her eye must be fed;
and what delight shall she have to look on the
devil? When the blood is made dull with the act of
sport, there should be, again to inflame it and to
give satiety a fresh appetite, loveliness in favour,
sympathy in years, manners and beauties; all which
the Moor is defective in: now, for want of these
required conveniences, her delicate tenderness will
find itself abused, begin to heave the gorge,
disrelish and abhor the Moor; very nature will
instruct her in it and compel her to some second
choice. Now, sir, this granted,--as it is a most
pregnant and unforced position--who stands so
eminent in the degree of this fortune as Cassio
does? a knave very voluble; no further
conscionable than in putting on the mere form of
civil and humane seeming, for the better compassing
of his salt and most hidden loose affection? why,
none; why, none: a slipper and subtle knave, a
finder of occasions, that has an eye can stamp and
counterfeit advantages, though true advantage never
present itself; a devilish knave. Besides, the
knave is handsome, young, and hath all those
requisites in him that folly and green minds look
after: a pestilent complete knave; and the woman
hath found him already.
I cannot believe that in her; shes full of
most blessed condition.
Blessed figs-end! the wine she drinks is made of
grapes: if she had been blessed, she would never
have loved the Moor. Blessed pudding! Didst thou
not see her paddle with the palm of his hand? didst
not mark that?
Yes, that I did; but that was but courtesy.
Lechery, by this hand; an index and obscure prologue
to the history of lust and foul thoughts. They met
so near with their lips that their breaths embraced
together. Villanous thoughts, Roderigo! when these
mutualities so marshal the way, hard at hand comes
the master and main exercise, the incorporate
conclusion, Pish! But, sir, be you ruled by me: I
have brought you from Venice. Watch you to-night;
for the command, Ill layt upon you. Cassio knows
you not. Ill not be far from you: do you find
some occasion to anger Cassio, either by speaking
too loud, or tainting his discipline; or from what
other course you please, which the time shall more
favourably minister.
Well.
Sir, he is rash and very sudden in choler, and haply
may strike at you: provoke him, that he may; for
even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to
mutiny; whose qualification shall come into no true
taste again but by the displanting of Cassio. So
shall you have a shorter journey to your desires by
the means I shall then have to prefer them; and the
impediment most profitably removed, without the
which there were no expectation of our prosperity.
I will do this, if I can bring it to any
opportunity.
I warrant thee. Meet me by and by at the citadel:
I must fetch his necessaries ashore. Farewell.
Adieu.
Exit
That Cassio loves her, I do well believe it;
That she loves him, tis apt and of great credit:
The Moor, howbeit that I endure him not,
Is of a constant, loving, noble nature,
And I dare think hell prove to Desdemona
A most dear husband. Now, I do love her too;
Not out of absolute lust, though peradventure
I stand accountant for as great a sin,
But partly led to diet my revenge,
For that I do suspect the lusty Moor
Hath leapd into my seat; the thought whereof
Doth, like a poisonous mineral, gnaw my inwards;
And nothing can or shall content my soul
Till I am evend with him, wife for wife,
Or failing so, yet that I put the Moor
At least into a jealousy so strong
That judgment cannot cure. Which thing to do,
If this poor trash of Venice, whom I trash
For his quick hunting, stand the putting on,
Ill have our Michael Cassio on the hip,
Abuse him to the Moor in the rank garb--
For I fear Cassio with my night-cap too--
Make the Moor thank me, love me and reward me.
For making him egregiously an ass
And practising upon his peace and quiet
Even to madness. Tis here, but yet confused:
Knaverys plain face is never seen tin used.
Exit
SCENE II. A street.
Enter a Herald with a proclamation; People following
It is Othellos pleasure, our noble and valiant
general, that, upon certain tidings now arrived,
importing the mere perdition of the Turkish fleet,
every man put himself into triumph; some to dance,
some to make bonfires, each man to what sport and
revels his addiction leads him: for, besides these
beneficial news, it is the celebration of his
nuptial. So much was his pleasure should be
proclaimed. All offices are open, and there is full
liberty of feasting from this present hour of five
till the bell have told eleven. Heaven bless the
isle of Cyprus and our noble general Othello!
Exeunt
SCENE III. A hall in the castle.
Enter OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, CASSIO, and Attendants
Good Michael, look you to the guard to-night:
Lets teach ourselves that honourable stop,
Not to outsport discretion.
Iago hath direction what to do;
But, notwithstanding, with my personal eye
Will I look tot.
Iago is most honest.
Michael, good night: to-morrow with your earliest
Let me have speech with you.
To DESDEMONA
Come, my dear love,
The purchase made, the fruits are to ensue;
That profits yet to come tween me and you.
Good night.
Exeunt OTHELLO, DESDEMONA, and Attendants
Enter IAGO
Welcome, Iago; we must to the watch.
Not this hour, lieutenant; tis not yet ten o the
clock. Our general cast us thus early for the love
of his Desdemona; who let us not therefore blame:
he hath not yet made wanton the night with her; and
she is sport for Jove.
Shes a most exquisite lady.
And, Ill warrant her, fun of game.
Indeed, shes a most fresh and delicate creature.
What an eye she has! methinks it sounds a parley of
provocation.
An inviting eye; and yet methinks right modest.
And when she speaks, is it not an alarum to love?
She is indeed perfection.
Well, happiness to their sheets! Come, lieutenant, I
have a stoup of wine; and here without are a brace
of Cyprus gallants that would fain have a measure to
the health of black Othello.
Not to-night, good Iago: I have very poor and
unhappy brains for drinking: I could well wish
courtesy would invent some other custom of
entertainment.
O, they are our friends; but one cup: Ill drink for
you.
I have drunk but one cup to-night, and that was
craftily qualified too, and, behold, what innovation
it makes here: I am unfortunate in the infirmity,
and dare not task my weakness with any more.
What, man! tis a night of revels: the gallants
desire it.
Where are they?
Here at the door; I pray you, call them in.
Ill dot; but it dislikes me.
Exit
If I can fasten but one cup upon him,
With that which he hath drunk to-night already,
Hell be as full of quarrel and offence
As my young mistress dog. Now, my sick fool Roderigo,
Whom love hath turnd almost the wrong side out,
To Desdemona hath to-night caroused
Potations pottle-deep; and hes to watch:
Three lads of Cyprus, noble swelling spirits,
That hold their honours in a wary distance,
The very elements of this warlike isle,
Have I to-night flusterd with flowing cups,
And they watch too. Now, mongst this flock of drunkards,
Am I to put our Cassio in some action
That may offend the isle.--But here they come:
If consequence do but approve my dream,
My boat sails freely, both with wind and stream.
Re-enter CASSIO; with him MONTANO and Gentlemen; servants following with wine
Fore God, they have given me a rouse already.
Good faith, a little one; not past a pint, as I am
a soldier.
Some wine, ho!
Sings
And let me the canakin clink, clink;
And let me the canakin clink
A soldiers a man;
A lifes but a span;
Why, then, let a soldier drink.
Some wine, boys!
Fore God, an excellent song.
I learned it in England, where, indeed, they are
most potent in potting: your Dane, your German, and
your swag-bellied Hollander--Drink, ho!--are nothing
to your English.
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking?
Why, he drinks you, with facility, your Dane dead
drunk; he sweats not to overthrow your Almain; he
gives your Hollander a vomit, ere the next pottle
can be filled.
To the health of our general!
I am for it, lieutenant; and Ill do you justice.
O sweet England!
King Stephen was a worthy peer,
His breeches cost him but a crown;
He held them sixpence all too dear,
With that he calld the tailor lown.
He was a wight of high renown,
And thou art but of low degree:
Tis pride that pulls the country down;
Then take thine auld cloak about thee.
Some wine, ho!
Why, this is a more exquisite song than the other.
Will you heart again?
No; for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that
does those things. Well, Gods above all; and there
be souls must be saved, and there be souls must not be saved.
Its true, good lieutenant.
For mine own part,--no offence to the general, nor
any man of quality,--I hope to be saved.
And so do I too, lieutenant.
Ay, but, by your leave, not before me; the
lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient. Lets
have no more of this; lets to our affairs.--Forgive
us our sins!--Gentlemen, lets look to our business.
Do not think, gentlemen. I am drunk: this is my
ancient; this is my right hand, and this is my left:
I am not drunk now; I can stand well enough, and
speak well enough.
Excellent well.
Why, very well then; you must not think then that I am drunk.
Exit
To the platform, masters; come, lets set the watch.
You see this fellow that is gone before;
He is a soldier fit to stand by Caesar
And give direction: and do but see his vice;
Tis to his virtue a just equinox,
The one as long as the other: tis pity of him.
I fear the trust Othello puts him in.
On some odd time of his infirmity,
Will shake this island.
But is he often thus?
Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep:
Hell watch the horologe a double set,
If drink rock not his cradle.
It were well
The general were put in mind of it.
Perhaps he sees it not; or his good nature
Prizes the virtue that appears in Cassio,
And looks not on his evils: is not this true?
Enter RODERIGO
[Aside to him]  How now, Roderigo!
I pray you, after the lieutenant; go.
Exit RODERIGO
And tis great pity that the noble Moor
Should hazard such a place as his own second
With one of an ingraft infirmity:
It were an honest action to say
So to the Moor.
Not I, for this fair island:
I do love Cassio well; and would do much
To cure him of this evil--But, hark! what noise?
Cry within: Help! help!
Re-enter CASSIO, driving in RODERIGO
You rogue! you rascal!
Whats the matter, lieutenant?
A knave teach me my duty!
Ill beat the knave into a twiggen bottle.
Beat me!
Dost thou prate, rogue?
Striking RODERIGO
Nay, good lieutenant;
Staying him
I pray you, sir, hold your hand.
Let me go, sir,
Or Ill knock you oer the mazzard.
Come, come,
youre drunk.
Drunk!
They fight
[Aside to RODERIGO]  Away, I say; go out, and cry a mutiny.
Exit RODERIGO
Nay, good lieutenant,--alas, gentlemen;--
Help, ho!--Lieutenant,--sir,--Montano,--sir;
Help, masters!--Heres a goodly watch indeed!
Bell rings
Whos that which rings the bell?--Diablo, ho!
The town will rise: Gods will, lieutenant, hold!
You will be shamed for ever.
Re-enter OTHELLO and Attendants
What is the matter here?
Zounds, I bleed still; I am hurt to the death.
Faints
Hold, for your lives!
Hold, ho! Lieutenant,--sir--Montano,--gentlemen,--
Have you forgot all sense of place and duty?
Hold! the general speaks to you; hold, hold, for shame!
Why, how now, ho! from whence ariseth this?
Are we turnd Turks, and to ourselves do that
Which heaven hath forbid the Ottomites?
For Christian shame, put by this barbarous brawl:
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage
Holds his soul light; he dies upon his motion.
Silence that dreadful bell: it frights the isle
From her propriety. What is the matter, masters?
Honest Iago, that lookst dead with grieving,
Speak, who began this? on thy love, I charge thee.
I do not know: friends all but now, even now,
In quarter, and in terms like bride and groom
Devesting them for bed; and then, but now--
As if some planet had unwitted men--
Swords out, and tilting one at others breast,
In opposition bloody. I cannot speak
Any beginning to this peevish odds;
And would in action glorious I had lost
Those legs that brought me to a part of it!
How comes it, Michael, you are thus forgot?
I pray you, pardon me; I cannot speak.
Worthy Montano, you were wont be civil;
The gravity and stillness of your youth
The world hath noted, and your name is great
In mouths of wisest censure: whats the matter,
That you unlace your reputation thus
And spend your rich opinion for the name
Of a night-brawler? give me answer to it.
Worthy Othello, I am hurt to danger:
Your officer, Iago, can inform you,--
While I spare speech, which something now
offends me,--
Of all that I do know: nor know I aught
By me thats said or done amiss this night;
Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice,
And to defend ourselves it be a sin
When violence assails us.
Now, by heaven,
My blood begins my safer guides to rule;
And passion, having my best judgment collied,
Assays to lead the way: if I once stir,
Or do but lift this arm, the best of you
Shall sink in my rebuke. Give me to know
How this foul rout began, who set it on;
And he that is approved in this offence,
Though he had twinnd with me, both at a birth,
Shall lose me. What! in a town of war,
Yet wild, the peoples hearts brimful of fear,
To manage private and domestic quarrel,
In night, and on the court and guard of safety!
Tis monstrous. Iago, who begant?
If partially affined, or leagued in office,
Thou dost deliver more or less than truth,
Thou art no soldier.
Touch me not so near:
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth
Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio;
Yet, I persuade myself, to speak the truth
Shall nothing wrong him. Thus it is, general.
Montano and myself being in speech,
There comes a fellow crying out for help:
And Cassio following him with determined sword,
To execute upon him. Sir, this gentleman
Steps in to Cassio, and entreats his pause:
Myself the crying fellow did pursue,
Lest by his clamour--as it so fell out--
The town might fall in fright: he, swift of foot,
Outran my purpose; and I returnd the rather
For that I heard the clink and fall of swords,
And Cassio high in oath; which till to-night
I neer might say before. When I came back--
For this was brief--I found them close together,
At blow and thrust; even as again they were
When you yourself did part them.
More of this matter cannot I report:
But men are men; the best sometimes forget:
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him,
As men in rage strike those that wish them best,
Yet surely Cassio, I believe, received
From him that fled some strange indignity,
Which patience could not pass.
I know, Iago,
Thy honesty and love doth mince this matter,
Making it light to Cassio. Cassio, I love thee
But never more be officer of mine.
Re-enter DESDEMONA, attended
Look, if my gentle love be not raised up!
Ill make thee an example.
Whats the matter?
Alls well now, sweeting; come away to bed.
Sir, for your hurts, myself will be your surgeon:
Lead him off.
To MONTANO, who is led off
Iago, look with care about the town,
And silence those whom this vile brawl distracted.
Come, Desdemona: tis the soldiers life
To have their balmy slumbers waked with strife.
Exeunt all but IAGO and CASSIO
What, are you hurt, lieutenant?
Ay, past all surgery.
Marry, heaven forbid!
Reputation, reputation, reputation! O, I have lost
my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of
myself, and what remains is bestial. My reputation,
Iago, my reputation!
As I am an honest man, I thought you had received
some bodily wound; there is more sense in that than
in reputation. Reputation is an idle and most false
imposition: oft got without merit, and lost without
deserving: you have lost no reputation at all,
unless you repute yourself such a loser. What, man!
there are ways to recover the general again: you
are but now cast in his mood, a punishment more in
policy than in malice, even so as one would beat his
offenceless dog to affright an imperious lion: sue
to him again, and hes yours.
I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so
good a commander with so slight, so drunken, and so
indiscreet an officer. Drunk? and speak parrot?
and squabble? swagger? swear? and discourse
fustian with ones own shadow? O thou invisible
spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by,
let us call thee devil!
What was he that you followed with your sword? What
had he done to you?
I know not.
Ist possible?
I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly;
a quarrel, but nothing wherefore. O God, that men
should put an enemy in their mouths to steal away
their brains! that we should, with joy, pleasance
revel and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!
Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus
recovered?
It hath pleased the devil drunkenness to give place
to the devil wrath; one unperfectness shows me
another, to make me frankly despise myself.
Come, you are too severe a moraler: as the time,
the place, and the condition of this country
stands, I could heartily wish this had not befallen;
but, since it is as it is, mend it for your own good.
I will ask him for my place again; he shall tell me
I am a drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra,
such an answer would stop them all. To be now a
sensible man, by and by a fool, and presently a
beast! O strange! Every inordinate cup is
unblessed and the ingredient is a devil.
Come, come, good wine is a good familiar creature,
if it be well used: exclaim no more against it.
And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love you.
I have well approved it, sir. I drunk!
You or any man living may be drunk! at a time, man.
Ill tell you what you shall do. Our generals wife
is now the general: may say so in this respect, for
that he hath devoted and given up himself to the
contemplation, mark, and denotement of her parts and
graces: confess yourself freely to her; importune
her help to put you in your place again: she is of
so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a disposition,
she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more
than she is requested: this broken joint between
you and her husband entreat her to splinter; and, my
fortunes against any lay worth naming, this
crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before.
You advise me well.
I protest, in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.
I think it freely; and betimes in the morning I will
beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me:
I am desperate of my fortunes if they cheque me here.
You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant; I
must to the watch.
CASSIO: Good night, honest Iago.
Exit
And whats he then that says I play the villain?
When this advice is free I give and honest,
Probal to thinking and indeed the course
To win the Moor again? For tis most easy
The inclining Desdemona to subdue
In any honest suit: shes framed as fruitful
As the free elements. And then for her
To win the Moor--weret to renounce his baptism,
All seals and symbols of redeemed sin,
His soul is so enfetterd to her love,
That she may make, unmake, do what she list,
Even as her appetite shall play the god
With his weak function. How am I then a villain
To counsel Cassio to this parallel course,
Directly to his good? Divinity of hell!
When devils will the blackest sins put on,
They do suggest at first with heavenly shows,
As I do now: for whiles this honest fool
Plies Desdemona to repair his fortunes
And she for him pleads strongly to the Moor,
Ill pour this pestilence into his ear,
That she repeals him for her bodys lust;
And by how much she strives to do him good,
She shall undo her credit with the Moor.
So will I turn her virtue into pitch,
And out of her own goodness make the net
That shall enmesh them all.
Re-enter RODERIGO
How now, Roderigo!
I do follow here in the chase, not like a hound that
hunts, but one that fills up the cry. My money is
almost spent; I have been to-night exceedingly well
cudgelled; and I think the issue will be, I shall
have so much experience for my pains, and so, with
no money at all and a little more wit, return again to Venice.
How poor are they that have not patience!
What wound did ever heal but by degrees?
Thou knowst we work by wit, and not by witchcraft;
And wit depends on dilatory time.
Doest not go well? Cassio hath beaten thee.
And thou, by that small hurt, hast cashierd Cassio:
Though other things grow fair against the sun,
Yet fruits that blossom first will first be ripe:
Content thyself awhile. By the mass, tis morning;
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short.
Retire thee; go where thou art billeted:
Away, I say; thou shalt know more hereafter:
Nay, get thee gone.
Exit RODERIGO
Two things are to be done:
My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress;
Ill set her on;
Myself the while to draw the Moor apart,
And bring him jump when he may Cassio find
Soliciting his wife: ay, thats the way
Dull not device by coldness and delay.
Exit
ACT III
SCENE I. Before the castle.
Enter CASSIO and some Musicians
Masters, play here; I will content your pains;
Something thats brief; and bid Good morrow, general.
Music
Enter Clown
Why masters, have your instruments been in Naples,
that they speak i the nose thus?
How, sir, how!
Are these, I pray you, wind-instruments?
Ay, marry, are they, sir.
O, thereby hangs a tail.
Whereby hangs a tale, sir?
Marry. sir, by many a wind-instrument that I know.
But, masters, heres money for you: and the general
so likes your music, that he desires you, for loves
sake, to make no more noise with it.
Well, sir, we will not.
If you have any music that may not be heard, tot
again: but, as they say to hear music the general
does not greatly care.
We have none such, sir.
Then put up your pipes in your bag, for Ill away:
go; vanish into air; away!
Exeunt Musicians
Dost thou hear, my honest friend?
No, I hear not your honest friend; I hear you.
Prithee, keep up thy quillets. Theres a poor piece
of gold for thee: if the gentlewoman that attends
the generals wife be stirring, tell her theres
one Cassio entreats her a little favour of speech:
wilt thou do this?
She is stirring, sir: if she will stir hither, I
shall seem to notify unto her.
Do, good my friend.
Exit Clown
Enter IAGO
In happy time, Iago.
You have not been a-bed, then?
Why, no; the day had broke
Before we parted. I have made bold, Iago,
To send in to your wife: my suit to her
Is, that she will to virtuous Desdemona
Procure me some access.
Ill send her to you presently;
And Ill devise a mean to draw the Moor
Out of the way, that your converse and business
May be more free.
I humbly thank you fort.
Exit IAGO
I never knew
A Florentine more kind and honest.
Enter EMILIA
Good morrow, good Lieutenant: I am sorry
For your displeasure; but all will sure be well.
The general and his wife are talking of it;
And she speaks for you stoutly: the Moor replies,
That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus,
And great affinity, and that in wholesome wisdom
He might not but refuse you; but he protests he loves you
And needs no other suitor but his likings
To take the safest occasion by the front
To bring you in again.
Yet, I beseech you,
If you think fit, or that it may be done,
Give me advantage of some brief discourse
With Desdemona alone.
Pray you, come in;
I will bestow you where you shall have time
To speak your bosom freely.
I am much bound to you.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A room in the castle.
Enter OTHELLO, IAGO, and Gentlemen
These letters give, Iago, to the pilot;
And by him do my duties to the senate:
That done, I will be walking on the works;
Repair there to me.
Well, my good lord, Ill dot.
This fortification, gentlemen, shall we seet?
Well wait upon your lordship.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The garden of the castle.
Enter DESDEMONA, CASSIO, and EMILIA
Be thou assured, good Cassio, I will do
All my abilities in thy behalf.
Good madam, do: I warrant it grieves my husband,
As if the case were his.
O, thats an honest fellow. Do not doubt, Cassio,
But I will have my lord and you again
As friendly as you were.
Bounteous madam,
Whatever shall become of Michael Cassio,
Hes never any thing but your true servant.
I knowt; I thank you. You do love my lord:
You have known him long; and be you well assured
He shall in strangeness stand no further off
Than in a polite distance.
Ay, but, lady,
That policy may either last so long,
Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet,
Or breed itself so out of circumstance,
That, I being absent and my place supplied,
My general will forget my love and service.
Do not doubt that; before Emilia here
I give thee warrant of thy place: assure thee,
If I do vow a friendship, Ill perform it
To the last article: my lord shall never rest;
Ill watch him tame and talk him out of patience;
His bed shall seem a school, his board a shrift;
Ill intermingle every thing he does
With Cassios suit: therefore be merry, Cassio;
For thy solicitor shall rather die
Than give thy cause away.
Madam, here comes my lord.
Madam, Ill take my leave.
Why, stay, and hear me speak.
Madam, not now: I am very ill at ease,
Unfit for mine own purposes.
Well, do your discretion.
Exit CASSIO
Enter OTHELLO and IAGO
Ha! I like not that.
What dost thou say?
Nothing, my lord: or if--I know not what.
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife?
Cassio, my lord! No, sure, I cannot think it,
That he would steal away so guilty-like,
Seeing you coming.
I do believe twas he.
How now, my lord!
I have been talking with a suitor here,
A man that languishes in your displeasure.
Who ist you mean?
Why, your lieutenant, Cassio. Good my lord,
If I have any grace or power to move you,
His present reconciliation take;
For if he be not one that truly loves you,
That errs in ignorance and not in cunning,
I have no judgment in an honest face:
I prithee, call him back.
Went he hence now?
Ay, sooth; so humbled
That he hath left part of his grief with me,
To suffer with him. Good love, call him back.
Not now, sweet Desdemona; some other time.
But shallt be shortly?
The sooner, sweet, for you.
Shallt be to-night at supper?
No, not to-night.
To-morrow dinner, then?
I shall not dine at home;
I meet the captains at the citadel.
Why, then, to-morrow night; or Tuesday morn;
On Tuesday noon, or night; on Wednesday morn:
I prithee, name the time, but let it not
Exceed three days: in faith, hes penitent;
And yet his trespass, in our common reason--
Save that, they say, the wars must make examples
Out of their best--is not almost a fault
To incur a private cheque. When shall he come?
Tell me, Othello: I wonder in my soul,
What you would ask me, that I should deny,
Or stand so mammering on. What! Michael Cassio,
That came a-wooing with you, and so many a time,
When I have spoke of you dispraisingly,
Hath taen your part; to have so much to do
To bring him in! Trust me, I could do much,--
Prithee, no more: let him come when he will;
I will deny thee nothing.
Why, this is not a boon;
Tis as I should entreat you wear your gloves,
Or feed on nourishing dishes, or keep you warm,
Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit
To your own person: nay, when I have a suit
Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed,
It shall be full of poise and difficult weight
And fearful to be granted.
I will deny thee nothing:
Whereon, I do beseech thee, grant me this,
To leave me but a little to myself.
Shall I deny you? no: farewell, my lord.
Farewell, my Desdemona: Ill come to thee straight.
Emilia, come. Be as your fancies teach you;
Whateer you be, I am obedient.
Exeunt DESDEMONA and EMILIA
Excellent wretch! Perdition catch my soul,
But I do love thee! and when I love thee not,
Chaos is come again.
My noble lord--
What dost thou say, Iago?
Did Michael Cassio, when you wood my lady,
Know of your love?
He did, from first to last: why dost thou ask?
But for a satisfaction of my thought;
No further harm.
Why of thy thought, Iago?
I did not think he had been acquainted with her.
O, yes; and went between us very oft.
Indeed!
Indeed! ay, indeed: discernst thou aught in that?
Is he not honest?
Honest, my lord!
Honest! ay, honest.
My lord, for aught I know.
What dost thou think?
Think, my lord!
Think, my lord!
By heaven, he echoes me,
As if there were some monster in his thought
Too hideous to be shown. Thou dost mean something:
I heard thee say even now, thou likedst not that,
When Cassio left my wife: what didst not like?
And when I told thee he was of my counsel
In my whole course of wooing, thou criedst Indeed!
And didst contract and purse thy brow together,
As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain
Some horrible conceit: if thou dost love me,
Show me thy thought.
My lord, you know I love you.
I think thou dost;
And, for I know thourt full of love and honesty,
And weighst thy words before thou givest them breath,
Therefore these stops of thine fright me the more:
For such things in a false disloyal knave
Are tricks of custom, but in a man thats just
They are close delations, working from the heart
That passion cannot rule.
For Michael Cassio,
I dare be sworn I think that he is honest.
I think so too.
Men should be what they seem;
Or those that be not, would they might seem none!
Certain, men should be what they seem.
Why, then, I think Cassios an honest man.
Nay, yet theres more in this:
I prithee, speak to me as to thy thinkings,
As thou dost ruminate, and give thy worst of thoughts
The worst of words.
Good my lord, pardon me:
Though I am bound to every act of duty,
I am not bound to that all slaves are free to.
Utter my thoughts? Why, say they are vile and false;
As wheres that palace whereinto foul things
Sometimes intrude not? who has a breast so pure,
But some uncleanly apprehensions
Keep leets and law-days and in session sit
With meditations lawful?
Thou dost conspire against thy friend, Iago,
If thou but thinkst him wrongd and makest his ear
A stranger to thy thoughts.
I do beseech you--
Though I perchance am vicious in my guess,
As, I confess, it is my natures plague
To spy into abuses, and oft my jealousy
Shapes faults that are not--that your wisdom yet,
From one that so imperfectly conceits,
Would take no notice, nor build yourself a trouble
Out of his scattering and unsure observance.
It were not for your quiet nor your good,
Nor for my manhood, honesty, or wisdom,
To let you know my thoughts.
What dost thou mean?
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls:
Who steals my purse steals trash; tis something, nothing;
Twas mine, tis his, and has been slave to thousands:
But he that filches from me my good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him
And makes me poor indeed.
By heaven, Ill know thy thoughts.
You cannot, if my heart were in your hand;
Nor shall not, whilst tis in my custody.
Ha!
O, beware, my lord, of jealousy;
It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock
The meat it feeds on; that cuckold lives in bliss
Who, certain of his fate, loves not his wronger;
But, O, what damned minutes tells he oer
Who dotes, yet doubts, suspects, yet strongly loves!
O misery!
Poor and content is rich and rich enough,
But riches fineless is as poor as winter
To him that ever fears he shall be poor.
Good heaven, the souls of all my tribe defend
From jealousy!
Why, why is this?
Thinkst thou Ild make a lie of jealousy,
To follow still the changes of the moon
With fresh suspicions? No; to be once in doubt
Is once to be resolved: exchange me for a goat,
When I shall turn the business of my soul
To such exsufflicate and blown surmises,
Matching thy inference. Tis not to make me jealous
To say my wife is fair, feeds well, loves company,
Is free of speech, sings, plays and dances well;
Where virtue is, these are more virtuous:
Nor from mine own weak merits will I draw
The smallest fear or doubt of her revolt;
For she had eyes, and chose me. No, Iago;
Ill see before I doubt; when I doubt, prove;
And on the proof, there is no more but this,--
Away at once with love or jealousy!
I am glad of it; for now I shall have reason
To show the love and duty that I bear you
With franker spirit: therefore, as I am bound,
Receive it from me. I speak not yet of proof.
Look to your wife; observe her well with Cassio;
Wear your eye thus, not jealous nor secure:
I would not have your free and noble nature,
Out of self-bounty, be abused; look tot:
I know our country disposition well;
In Venice they do let heaven see the pranks
They dare not show their husbands; their best conscience
Is not to leavet undone, but keept unknown.
Dost thou say so?
She did deceive her father, marrying you;
And when she seemd to shake and fear your looks,
She loved them most.
And so she did.
Why, go to then;
She that, so young, could give out such a seeming,
To seal her fathers eyes up close as oak-
He thought twas witchcraft--but I am much to blame;
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon
For too much loving you.
I am bound to thee for ever.
I see this hath a little dashd your spirits.
Not a jot, not a jot.
I faith, I fear it has.
I hope you will consider what is spoke
Comes from my love. But I do see youre moved:
I am to pray you not to strain my speech
To grosser issues nor to larger reach
Than to suspicion.
I will not.
Should you do so, my lord,
My speech should fall into such vile success
As my thoughts aim not at. Cassios my worthy friend--
My lord, I see youre moved.
No, not much moved:
I do not think but Desdemonas honest.
Long live she so! and long live you to think so!
And yet, how nature erring from itself,--
Ay, theres the point: as--to be bold with you--
Not to affect many proposed matches
Of her own clime, complexion, and degree,
Whereto we see in all things nature tends--
Foh! one may smell in such a will most rank,
Foul disproportion thoughts unnatural.
But pardon me; I do not in position
Distinctly speak of her; though I may fear
Her will, recoiling to her better judgment,
May fall to match you with her country forms
And happily repent.
Farewell, farewell:
If more thou dost perceive, let me know more;
Set on thy wife to observe: leave me, Iago:
[Going]  My lord, I take my leave.
Why did I marry? This honest creature doubtless
Sees and knows more, much more, than he unfolds.
[Returning]  My lord, I would I might entreat
your honour
To scan this thing no further; leave it to time:
Though it be fit that Cassio have his place,
For sure, he fills it up with great ability,
Yet, if you please to hold him off awhile,
You shall by that perceive him and his means:
Note, if your lady strain his entertainment
With any strong or vehement importunity;
Much will be seen in that. In the mean time,
Let me be thought too busy in my fears--
As worthy cause I have to fear I am--
And hold her free, I do beseech your honour.
Fear not my government.
I once more take my leave.
Exit
This fellows of exceeding honesty,
And knows all qualities, with a learned spirit,
Of human dealings. If I do prove her haggard,
Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings,
Ild whistle her off and let her down the wind,
To pray at fortune. Haply, for I am black
And have not those soft parts of conversation
That chamberers have, or for I am declined
Into the vale of years,--yet thats not much--
Shes gone. I am abused; and my relief
Must be to loathe her. O curse of marriage,
That we can call these delicate creatures ours,
And not their appetites! I had rather be a toad,
And live upon the vapour of a dungeon,
Than keep a corner in the thing I love
For others uses. Yet, tis the plague of great ones;
Prerogatived are they less than the base;
Tis destiny unshunnable, like death:
Even then this forked plague is fated to us
When we do quicken. Desdemona comes:
Re-enter DESDEMONA and EMILIA
If she be false, O, then heaven mocks itself!
Ill not believet.
How now, my dear Othello!
Your dinner, and the generous islanders
By you invited, do attend your presence.
I am to blame.
Why do you speak so faintly?
Are you not well?
I have a pain upon my forehead here.
Faith, thats with watching; twill away again:
Let me but bind it hard, within this hour
It will be well.
Your napkin is too little:
He puts the handkerchief from him; and it drops
Let it alone. Come, Ill go in with you.
I am very sorry that you are not well.
Exeunt OTHELLO and DESDEMONA
I am glad I have found this napkin:
This was her first remembrance from the Moor:
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
Wood me to steal it; but she so loves the token,
For he conjured her she should ever keep it,
That she reserves it evermore about her
To kiss and talk to. Ill have the work taen out,
And givet Iago: what he will do with it
Heaven knows, not I;
I nothing but to please his fantasy.
Re-enter Iago
How now! what do you here alone?
Do not you chide; I have a thing for you.
A thing for me? it is a common thing--
Ha!
To have a foolish wife.
O, is that all? What will you give me now
For the same handkerchief?
What handkerchief?
What handkerchief?
Why, that the Moor first gave to Desdemona;
That which so often you did bid me steal.
Hast stoln it from her?
No, faith; she let it drop by negligence.
And, to the advantage, I, being here, tookt up.
Look, here it is.
A good wench; give it me.
What will you do with t, that you have been
so earnest
To have me filch it?
[Snatching it]  Why, whats that to you?
If it be not for some purpose of import,
