For I have more to commune with Bianca.
Exit
Why, and I trust I may go too, may I not? What,
shall I be appointed hours; as though, belike, I
knew not what to take and what to leave, ha?
Exit
You may go to the devils dam: your gifts are so
good, heres none will hold you. Their love is not
so great, Hortensio, but we may blow our nails
together, and fast it fairly out: our cakes dough on
both sides. Farewell: yet for the love I bear my
sweet Bianca, if I can by any means light on a fit
man to teach her that wherein she delights, I will
wish him to her father.
So will I, Signior Gremio: but a word, I pray.
Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked
parle, know now, upon advice, it toucheth us both,
that we may yet again have access to our fair
mistress and be happy rivals in Biancos love, to
labour and effect one thing specially.
Whats that, I pray?
Marry, sir, to get a husband for her sister.
A husband! a devil.
I say, a husband.
I say, a devil. Thinkest thou, Hortensio, though
her father be very rich, any man is so very a fool
to be married to hell?
Tush, Gremio, though it pass your patience and mine
to endure her loud alarums, why, man, there be good
fellows in the world, an a man could light on them,
would take her with all faults, and money enough.
I cannot tell; but I had as lief take her dowry with
this condition, to be whipped at the high cross
every morning.
Faith, as you say, theres small choice in rotten
apples. But come; since this bar in law makes us
friends, it shall be so far forth friendly
maintained all by helping Baptistas eldest daughter
to a husband we set his youngest free for a husband,
and then have tot a fresh. Sweet Bianca! Happy man
be his dole! He that runs fastest gets the ring.
How say you, Signior Gremio?
I am agreed; and would I had given him the best
horse in Padua to begin his wooing that would
thoroughly woo her, wed her and bed her and rid the
house of her! Come on.
Exeunt GREMIO and HORTENSIO
I pray, sir, tell me, is it possible
That love should of a sudden take such hold?
O Tranio, till I found it to be true,
I never thought it possible or likely;
But see, while idly I stood looking on,
I found the effect of love in idleness:
And now in plainness do confess to thee,
That art to me as secret and as dear
As Anna to the queen of Carthage was,
Tranio, I burn, I pine, I perish, Tranio,
If I achieve not this young modest girl.
Counsel me, Tranio, for I know thou canst;
Assist me, Tranio, for I know thou wilt.
Master, it is no time to chide you now;
Affection is not rated from the heart:
If love have touchd you, nought remains but so,
Redime te captum quam queas minimo.
Gramercies, lad, go forward; this contents:
The rest will comfort, for thy counsels sound.
Master, you lookd so longly on the maid,
Perhaps you markd not whats the pith of all.
O yes, I saw sweet beauty in her face,
Such as the daughter of Agenor had,
That made great Jove to humble him to her hand.
When with his knees he kissd the Cretan strand.
Saw you no more? markd you not how her sister
Began to scold and raise up such a storm
That mortal ears might hardly endure the din?
Tranio, I saw her coral lips to move
And with her breath she did perfume the air:
Sacred and sweet was all I saw in her.
Nay, then, tis time to stir him from his trance.
I pray, awake, sir: if you love the maid,
Bend thoughts and wits to achieve her. Thus it stands:
Her eldest sister is so curst and shrewd
That till the father rid his hands of her,
Master, your love must live a maid at home;
And therefore has he closely mewd her up,
Because she will not be annoyd with suitors.
Ah, Tranio, what a cruel fathers he!
But art thou not advised, he took some care
To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her?
Ay, marry, am I, sir; and now tis plotted.
I have it, Tranio.
Master, for my hand,
Both our inventions meet and jump in one.
Tell me thine first.
You will be schoolmaster
And undertake the teaching of the maid:
Thats your device.
It is: may it be done?
Not possible; for who shall bear your part,
And be in Padua here Vincentios son,
Keep house and ply his book, welcome his friends,
Visit his countrymen and banquet them?
Basta; content thee, for I have it full.
We have not yet been seen in any house,
Nor can we lie distinguishd by our faces
For man or master; then it follows thus;
Thou shalt be master, Tranio, in my stead,
Keep house and port and servants as I should:
I will some other be, some Florentine,
Some Neapolitan, or meaner man of Pisa.
Tis hatchd and shall be so: Tranio, at once
Uncase thee; take my colourd hat and cloak:
When Biondello comes, he waits on thee;
But I will charm him first to keep his tongue.
So had you need.
In brief, sir, sith it your pleasure is,
And I am tied to be obedient;
For so your father charged me at our parting,
Be serviceable to my son, quoth he,
Although I think twas in another sense;
I am content to be Lucentio,
Because so well I love Lucentio.
Tranio, be so, because Lucentio loves:
And let me be a slave, to achieve that maid
Whose sudden sight hath thralld my wounded eye.
Here comes the rogue.
Enter BIONDELLO
Sirrah, where have you been?
Where have I been! Nay, how now! where are you?
Master, has my fellow Tranio stolen your clothes? Or
you stolen his? or both? pray, whats the news?
Sirrah, come hither: tis no time to jest,
And therefore frame your manners to the time.
Your fellow Tranio here, to save my life,
Puts my apparel and my countenance on,
And I for my escape have put on his;
For in a quarrel since I came ashore
I killd a man and fear I was descried:
Wait you on him, I charge you, as becomes,
While I make way from hence to save my life:
You understand me?
I, sir! neer a whit.
And not a jot of Tranio in your mouth:
Tranio is changed into Lucentio.
The better for him: would I were so too!
So could I, faith, boy, to have the next wish after,
That Lucentio indeed had Baptistas youngest daughter.
But, sirrah, not for my sake, but your masters, I advise
You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies:
When I am alone, why, then I am Tranio;
But in all places else your master Lucentio.
Tranio, lets go: one thing more rests, that
thyself execute, to make one among these wooers: if
thou ask me why, sufficeth, my reasons are both good
and weighty.
Exeunt
The presenters above speak
My lord, you nod; you do not mind the play.
Yes, by Saint Anne, do I. A good matter, surely:
comes there any more of it?
My lord, tis but begun.
Tis a very excellent piece of work, madam lady:
would twere done!
They sit and mark
SCENE II. Padua. Before HORTENSIOS house.
Enter PETRUCHIO and his man GRUMIO
Verona, for a while I take my leave,
To see my friends in Padua, but of all
My best beloved and approved friend,
Hortensio; and I trow this is his house.
Here, sirrah Grumio; knock, I say.
Knock, sir! whom should I knock? is there man has
rebused your worship?
Villain, I say, knock me here soundly.
Knock you here, sir! why, sir, what am I, sir, that
I should knock you here, sir?
Villain, I say, knock me at this gate
And rap me well, or Ill knock your knaves pate.
My master is grown quarrelsome. I should knock
you first,
And then I know after who comes by the worst.
Will it not be?
Faith, sirrah, an youll not knock, Ill ring it;
Ill try how you can sol, fa, and sing it.
He wrings him by the ears
Help, masters, help! my master is mad.
Now, knock when I bid you, sirrah villain!
Enter HORTENSIO
How now! whats the matter? My old friend Grumio!
and my good friend Petruchio! How do you all at Verona?
Signior Hortensio, come you to part the fray?
Con tutto il cuore, ben trovato, may I say.
Alla nostra casa ben venuto, molto honorato signor
mio Petruchio. Rise, Grumio, rise: we will compound
this quarrel.
Nay, tis no matter, sir, what he leges in Latin.
if this be not a lawful case for me to leave his
service, look you, sir, he bid me knock him and rap
him soundly, sir: well, was it fit for a servant to
use his master so, being perhaps, for aught I see,
two and thirty, a pip out? Whom would to God I had
well knockd at first, Then had not Grumio come by the worst.
A senseless villain! Good Hortensio,
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate
And could not get him for my heart to do it.
Knock at the gate! O heavens! Spake you not these
words plain, Sirrah, knock me here, rap me here,
knock me well, and knock me soundly? And come you
now with, knocking at the gate?
Sirrah, be gone, or talk not, I advise you.
Petruchio, patience; I am Grumios pledge:
Why, thiss a heavy chance twixt him and you,
Your ancient, trusty, pleasant servant Grumio.
And tell me now, sweet friend, what happy gale
Blows you to Padua here from old Verona?
Such wind as scatters young men through the world,
To seek their fortunes farther than at home
Where small experience grows. But in a few,
Signior Hortensio, thus it stands with me:
Antonio, my father, is deceased;
And I have thrust myself into this maze,
Haply to wive and thrive as best I may:
Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home,
And so am come abroad to see the world.
Petruchio, shall I then come roundly to thee
And wish thee to a shrewd ill-favourd wife?
Thouldst thank me but a little for my counsel:
And yet Ill promise thee she shall be rich
And very rich: but thourt too much my friend,
And Ill not wish thee to her.
Signior Hortensio, twixt such friends as we
Few words suffice; and therefore, if thou know
One rich enough to be Petruchios wife,
As wealth is burden of my wooing dance,
Be she as foul as was Florentius love,
As old as Sibyl and as curst and shrewd
As Socrates Xanthippe, or a worse,
She moves me not, or not removes, at least,
Affections edge in me, were she as rough
As are the swelling Adriatic seas:
I come to wive it wealthily in Padua;
If wealthily, then happily in Padua.
Nay, look you, sir, he tells you flatly what his
mind is: Why give him gold enough and marry him to
a puppet or an aglet-baby; or an old trot with neer
a tooth in her head, though she have as many diseases
as two and fifty horses: why, nothing comes amiss,
so money comes withal.
Petruchio, since we are steppd thus far in,
I will continue that I broachd in jest.
I can, Petruchio, help thee to a wife
With wealth enough and young and beauteous,
Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman:
Her only fault, and that is faults enough,
Is that she is intolerable curst
And shrewd and froward, so beyond all measure
That, were my state far worser than it is,
I would not wed her for a mine of gold.
Hortensio, peace! thou knowst not golds effect:
Tell me her fathers name and tis enough;
For I will board her, though she chide as loud
As thunder when the clouds in autumn crack.
Her father is Baptista Minola,
An affable and courteous gentleman:
Her name is Katharina Minola,
Renownd in Padua for her scolding tongue.
I know her father, though I know not her;
And he knew my deceased father well.
I will not sleep, Hortensio, till I see her;
And therefore let me be thus bold with you
To give you over at this first encounter,
Unless you will accompany me thither.
I pray you, sir, let him go while the humour lasts.
O my word, an she knew him as well as I do, she
would think scolding would do little good upon him:
she may perhaps call him half a score knaves or so:
why, thats nothing; an he begin once, hell rail in
his rope-tricks. Ill tell you what sir, an she
stand him but a little, he will throw a figure in
her face and so disfigure her with it that she
shall have no more eyes to see withal than a cat.
You know him not, sir.
Tarry, Petruchio, I must go with thee,
For in Baptistas keep my treasure is:
He hath the jewel of my life in hold,
His youngest daughter, beautiful Binaca,
And her withholds from me and other more,
Suitors to her and rivals in my love,
Supposing it a thing impossible,
For those defects I have before rehearsed,
That ever Katharina will be wood;
Therefore this order hath Baptista taen,
That none shall have access unto Bianca
Till Katharina the curst have got a husband.
Katharina the curst!
A title for a maid of all titles the worst.
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace,
And offer me disguised in sober robes
To old Baptista as a schoolmaster
Well seen in music, to instruct Bianca;
That so I may, by this device, at least
Have leave and leisure to make love to her
And unsuspected court her by herself.
Heres no knavery! See, to beguile the old folks,
how the young folks lay their heads together!
Enter GREMIO, and LUCENTIO disguised
Master, master, look about you: who goes there, ha?
Peace, Grumio! it is the rival of my love.
Petruchio, stand by a while.
A proper stripling and an amorous!
O, very well; I have perused the note.
Hark you, sir: Ill have them very fairly bound:
All books of love, see that at any hand;
And see you read no other lectures to her:
You understand me: over and beside
Signior Baptistas liberality,
Ill mend it with a largess. Take your paper too,
And let me have them very well perfumed
For she is sweeter than perfume itself
To whom they go to. What will you read to her?
Whateer I read to her, Ill plead for you
As for my patron, stand you so assured,
As firmly as yourself were still in place:
Yea, and perhaps with more successful words
Than you, unless you were a scholar, sir.
O this learning, what a thing it is!
O this woodcock, what an ass it is!
Peace, sirrah!
Grumio, mum! God save you, Signior Gremio.
And you are well met, Signior Hortensio.
Trow you whither I am going? To Baptista Minola.
I promised to inquire carefully
About a schoolmaster for the fair Bianca:
And by good fortune I have lighted well
On this young man, for learning and behavior
Fit for her turn, well read in poetry
And other books, good ones, I warrant ye.
Tis well; and I have met a gentleman
Hath promised me to help me to another,
A fine musician to instruct our mistress;
So shall I no whit be behind in duty
To fair Bianca, so beloved of me.
Beloved of me; and that my deeds shall prove.
And that his bags shall prove.
Gremio, tis now no time to vent our love:
Listen to me, and if you speak me fair,
Ill tell you news indifferent good for either.
Here is a gentleman whom by chance I met,
Upon agreement from us to his liking,
Will undertake to woo curst Katharina,
Yea, and to marry her, if her dowry please.
So said, so done, is well.
Hortensio, have you told him all her faults?
I know she is an irksome brawling scold:
If that be all, masters, I hear no harm.
No, sayst me so, friend? What countryman?
Born in Verona, old Antonios son:
My father dead, my fortune lives for me;
And I do hope good days and long to see.
O sir, such a life, with such a wife, were strange!
But if you have a stomach, tot i Gods name:
You shall have me assisting you in all.
But will you woo this wild-cat?
Will I live?
Will he woo her? ay, or Ill hang her.
Why came I hither but to that intent?
Think you a little din can daunt mine ears?
Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
Have I not heard the sea puffd up with winds
Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
And heavens artillery thunder in the skies?
Have I not in a pitched battle heard
Loud larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets clang?
And do you tell me of a womans tongue,
That gives not half so great a blow to hear
As will a chestnut in a farmers fire?
Tush, tush! fear boys with bugs.
For he fears none.
Hortensio, hark:
This gentleman is happily arrived,
My mind presumes, for his own good and ours.
I promised we would be contributors
And bear his charging of wooing, whatsoeer.
And so we will, provided that he win her.
I would I were as sure of a good dinner.
Enter TRANIO brave, and BIONDELLO
Gentlemen, God save you. If I may be bold,
Tell me, I beseech you, which is the readiest way
To the house of Signior Baptista Minola?
He that has the two fair daughters: ist he you mean?
Even he, Biondello.
Hark you, sir; you mean not her to--
Perhaps, him and her, sir: what have you to do?
Not her that chides, sir, at any hand, I pray.
I love no chiders, sir. Biondello, lets away.
Well begun, Tranio.
Sir, a word ere you go;
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of, yea or no?
And if I be, sir, is it any offence?
No; if without more words you will get you hence.
Why, sir, I pray, are not the streets as free
For me as for you?
But so is not she.
For what reason, I beseech you?
For this reason, if youll know,
That shes the choice love of Signior Gremio.
That shes the chosen of Signior Hortensio.
Softly, my masters! if you be gentlemen,
Do me this right; hear me with patience.
Baptista is a noble gentleman,
To whom my father is not all unknown;
And were his daughter fairer than she is,
She may more suitors have and me for one.
Fair Ledas daughter had a thousand wooers;
Then well one more may fair Bianca have:
And so she shall; Lucentio shall make one,
Though Paris came in hope to speed alone.
What! this gentleman will out-talk us all.
Sir, give him head: I know hell prove a jade.
Hortensio, to what end are all these words?
Sir, let me be so bold as ask you,
Did you yet ever see Baptistas daughter?
No, sir; but hear I do that he hath two,
The one as famous for a scolding tongue
As is the other for beauteous modesty.
Sir, sir, the firsts for me; let her go by.
Yea, leave that labour to great Hercules;
And let it be more than Alcides twelve.
Sir, understand you this of me in sooth:
The younges t daughter whom you hearken for
Her father keeps from all access of suitors,
And will not promise her to any man
Until the elder sister first be wed:
The younger then is free and not before.
If it be so, sir, that you are the man
Must stead us all and me amongst the rest,
And if you break the ice and do this feat,
Achieve the elder, set the younger free
For our access, whose hap shall be to have her
Will not so graceless be to be ingrate.
Sir, you say well and well you do conceive;
And since you do profess to be a suitor,
You must, as we do, gratify this gentleman,
To whom we all rest generally beholding.
Sir, I shall not be slack: in sign whereof,
Please ye we may contrive this afternoon,
And quaff carouses to our mistress health,
And do as adversaries do in law,
Strive mightily, but eat and drink as friends.
O excellent motion! Fellows, lets be gone.
The motions good indeed and be it so,
Petruchio, I shall be your ben venuto.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Padua. A room in BAPTISTAS house.
Enter KATHARINA and BIANCA
Good sister, wrong me not, nor wrong yourself,
To make a bondmaid and a slave of me;
That I disdain: but for these other gawds,
Unbind my hands, Ill pull them off myself,
Yea, all my raiment, to my petticoat;
Or what you will command me will I do,
So well I know my duty to my elders.
Of all thy suitors, here I charge thee, tell
Whom thou lovest best: see thou dissemble not.
Believe me, sister, of all the men alive
I never yet beheld that special face
Which I could fancy more than any other.
Minion, thou liest. Ist not Hortensio?
If you affect him, sister, here I swear
Ill plead for you myself, but you shall have
him.
O then, belike, you fancy riches more:
You will have Gremio to keep you fair.
Is it for him you do envy me so?
Nay then you jest, and now I well perceive
You have but jested with me all this while:
I prithee, sister Kate, untie my hands.
If that be jest, then all the rest was so.
Strikes her
Enter BAPTISTA
Why, how now, dame! whence grows this insolence?
Bianca, stand aside. Poor girl! she weeps.
Go ply thy needle; meddle not with her.
For shame, thou helding of a devilish spirit,
Why dost thou wrong her that did neer wrong thee?
When did she cross thee with a bitter word?
Her silence flouts me, and Ill be revenged.
Flies after BIANCA
What, in my sight? Bianca, get thee in.
Exit BIANCA
What, will you not suffer me? Nay, now I see
She is your treasure, she must have a husband;
I must dance bare-foot on her wedding day
And for your love to her lead apes in hell.
Talk not to me: I will go sit and weep
Till I can find occasion of revenge.
Exit
Was ever gentleman thus grieved as I?
But who comes here?
Enter GREMIO, LUCENTIO in the habit of a mean man;  PETRUCHIO, with HORTENSIO as a musician; and TRANIO, with BIONDELLO bearing a lute and books
Good morrow, neighbour Baptista.
Good morrow, neighbour Gremio.
God save you, gentlemen!
And you, good sir! Pray, have you not a daughter
Calld Katharina, fair and virtuous?
I have a daughter, sir, called Katharina.
You are too blunt: go to it orderly.
You wrong me, Signior Gremio: give me leave.
I am a gentleman of Verona, sir,
That, hearing of her beauty and her wit,
Her affability and bashful modesty,
Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior,
Am bold to show myself a forward guest
Within your house, to make mine eye the witness
Of that report which I so oft have heard.
And, for an entrance to my entertainment,
I do present you with a man of mine,
Presenting HORTENSIO
Cunning in music and the mathematics,
To instruct her fully in those sciences,
Whereof I know she is not ignorant:
Accept of him, or else you do me wrong:
His name is Licio, born in Mantua.
Youre welcome, sir; and he, for your good sake.
But for my daughter Katharina, this I know,
She is not for your turn, the more my grief.
I see you do not mean to part with her,
Or else you like not of my company.
Mistake me not; I speak but as I find.
Whence are you, sir? what may I call your name?
Petruchio is my name; Antonios son,
A man well known throughout all Italy.
I know him well: you are welcome for his sake.
Saving your tale, Petruchio, I pray,
Let us, that are poor petitioners, speak too:
Baccare! you are marvellous forward.
O, pardon me, Signior Gremio; I would fain be doing.
I doubt it not, sir; but you will curse your
wooing. Neighbour, this is a gift very grateful, I am
sure of it. To express the like kindness, myself,
that have been more kindly beholding to you than
any, freely give unto you this young scholar,
Presenting LUCENTIO
that hath been long studying at Rheims; as cunning
in Greek, Latin, and other languages, as the other
in music and mathematics: his name is Cambio; pray,
accept his service.
A thousand thanks, Signior Gremio.
Welcome, good Cambio.
To TRANIO
But, gentle sir, methinks you walk like a stranger:
may I be so bold to know the cause of your coming?
Pardon me, sir, the boldness is mine own,
That, being a stranger in this city here,
Do make myself a suitor to your daughter,
Unto Bianca, fair and virtuous.
Nor is your firm resolve unknown to me,
In the preferment of the eldest sister.
This liberty is all that I request,
That, upon knowledge of my parentage,
I may have welcome mongst the rest that woo
And free access and favour as the rest:
And, toward the education of your daughters,
I here bestow a simple instrument,
And this small packet of Greek and Latin books:
If you accept them, then their worth is great.
Lucentio is your name; of whence, I pray?
Of Pisa, sir; son to Vincentio.
A mighty man of Pisa; by report
I know him well: you are very welcome, sir,
Take you the lute, and you the set of books;
You shall go see your pupils presently.
Holla, within!
Enter a Servant
Sirrah, lead these gentlemen
To my daughters; and tell them both,
These are their tutors: bid them use them well.
Exit Servant, with LUCENTIO and HORTENSIO, BIONDELLO following
We will go walk a little in the orchard,
And then to dinner. You are passing welcome,
And so I pray you all to think yourselves.
Signior Baptista, my business asketh haste,
And every day I cannot come to woo.
You knew my father well, and in him me,
Left solely heir to all his lands and goods,
Which I have betterd rather than decreased:
Then tell me, if I get your daughters love,
What dowry shall I have with her to wife?
After my death the one half of my lands,
And in possession twenty thousand crowns.
And, for that dowry, Ill assure her of
Her widowhood, be it that she survive me,
In all my lands and leases whatsoever:
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us,
That covenants may be kept on either hand.
Ay, when the special thing is well obtaind,
That is, her love; for that is all in all.
Why, that is nothing: for I tell you, father,
I am as peremptory as she proud-minded;
And where two raging fires meet together
They do consume the thing that feeds their fury:
Though little fire grows great with little wind,
Yet extreme gusts will blow out fire and all:
So I to her and so she yields to me;
For I am rough and woo not like a babe.
Well mayst thou woo, and happy be thy speed!
But be thou armd for some unhappy words.
Ay, to the proof; as mountains are for winds,
That shake not, though they blow perpetually.
Re-enter HORTENSIO, with his head broke
How now, my friend! why dost thou look so pale?
For fear, I promise you, if I look pale.
What, will my daughter prove a good musician?
I think shell sooner prove a soldier
Iron may hold with her, but never lutes.
Why, then thou canst not break her to the lute?
Why, no; for she hath broke the lute to me.
I did but tell her she mistook her frets,
And bowd her hand to teach her fingering;
When, with a most impatient devilish spirit,
Frets, call you these? quoth she; Ill fume
with them:
And, with that word, she struck me on the head,
And through the instrument my pate made way;
And there I stood amazed for a while,
As on a pillory, looking through the lute;
While she did call me rascal fiddler
And twangling Jack; with twenty such vile terms,
As had she studied to misuse me so.
Now, by the world, it is a lusty wench;
I love her ten times more than eer I did:
O, how I long to have some chat with her!
Well, go with me and be not so discomfited:
Proceed in practise with my younger daughter;
Shes apt to learn and thankful for good turns.
Signior Petruchio, will you go with us,
Or shall I send my daughter Kate to you?
I pray you do.
Exeunt all but PETRUCHIO
I will attend her here,
And woo her with some spirit when she comes.
Say that she rail; why then Ill tell her plain
She sings as sweetly as a nightingale:
Say that she frown, Ill say she looks as clear
As morning roses newly washd with dew:
Say she be mute and will not speak a word;
Then Ill commend her volubility,
And say she uttereth piercing eloquence:
If she do bid me pack, Ill give her thanks,
As though she bid me stay by her a week:
If she deny to wed, Ill crave the day
When I shall ask the banns and when be married.
But here she comes; and now, Petruchio, speak.
Enter KATHARINA
Good morrow, Kate; for thats your name, I hear.
Well have you heard, but something hard of hearing:
They call me Katharina that do talk of me.
You lie, in faith; for you are calld plain Kate,
And bonny Kate and sometimes Kate the curst;
But Kate, the prettiest Kate in Christendom
Kate of Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate,
For dainties are all Kates, and therefore, Kate,
Take this of me, Kate of my consolation;
Hearing thy mildness praised in every town,
Thy virtues spoke of, and thy beauty sounded,
Yet not so deeply as to thee belongs,
Myself am moved to woo thee for my wife.
Moved! in good time: let him that moved you hither
Remove you hence: I knew you at the first
You were a moveable.
Why, whats a moveable?
A joind-stool.
Thou hast hit it: come, sit on me.
Asses are made to bear, and so are you.
Women are made to bear, and so are you.
No such jade as you, if me you mean.
Alas! good Kate, I will not burden thee;
For, knowing thee to be but young and light--
Too light for such a swain as you to catch;
And yet as heavy as my weight should be.
Should be! should--buzz!
Well taen, and like a buzzard.
O slow-wingd turtle! shall a buzzard take thee?
Ay, for a turtle, as he takes a buzzard.
Come, come, you wasp; i faith, you are too angry.
If I be waspish, best beware my sting.
My remedy is then, to pluck it out.
Ay, if the fool could find it where it lies,
Who knows not where a wasp does
wear his sting? In his tail.
In his tongue.
Whose tongue?
Yours, if you talk of tails: and so farewell.
What, with my tongue in your tail? nay, come again,
Good Kate; I am a gentleman.
That Ill try.
She strikes him
I swear Ill cuff you, if you strike again.
So may you lose your arms:
If you strike me, you are no gentleman;
And if no gentleman, why then no arms.
A herald, Kate? O, put me in thy books!
What is your crest? a coxcomb?
A combless cock, so Kate will be my hen.
No cock of mine; you crow too like a craven.
Nay, come, Kate, come; you must not look so sour.
It is my fashion, when I see a crab.
Why, heres no crab; and therefore look not sour.
There is, there is.
Then show it me.
Had I a glass, I would.
What, you mean my face?
Well aimd of such a young one.
Now, by Saint George, I am too young for you.
Yet you are witherd.
Tis with cares.
I care not.
Nay, hear you, Kate: in sooth you scape not so.
I chafe you, if I tarry: let me go.
No, not a whit: I find you passing gentle.
Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen,
And now I find report a very liar;
For thou are pleasant, gamesome, passing courteous,
But slow in speech, yet sweet as spring-time flowers:
Thou canst not frown, thou canst not look askance,
Nor bite the lip, as angry wenches will,
Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk,
But thou with mildness entertainst thy wooers,
With gentle conference, soft and affable.
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp?
O slanderous world! Kate like the hazel-twig
Is straight and slender and as brown in hue
As hazel nuts and sweeter than the kernels.
O, let me see thee walk: thou dost not halt.
Go, fool, and whom thou keepst command.
Did ever Dian so become a grove
As Kate this chamber with her princely gait?
O, be thou Dian, and let her be Kate;
And then let Kate be chaste and Dian sportful!
Where did you study all this goodly speech?
It is extempore, from my mother-wit.
A witty mother! witless else her son.
Am I not wise?
Yes; keep you warm.
Marry, so I mean, sweet Katharina, in thy bed:
And therefore, setting all this chat aside,
Thus in plain terms: your father hath consented
That you shall be my wife; your dowry greed on;
And, Will you, nill you, I will marry you.
Now, Kate, I am a husband for your turn;
For, by this light, whereby I see thy beauty,
Thy beauty, that doth make me like thee well,
Thou must be married to no man but me;
For I am he am born to tame you Kate,
And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate
Conformable as other household Kates.
Here comes your father: never make denial;
I must and will have Katharina to my wife.
Re-enter BAPTISTA, GREMIO, and TRANIO
Now, Signior Petruchio, how speed you with my daughter?
How but well, sir? how but well?
It were impossible I should speed amiss.
Why, how now, daughter Katharina! in your dumps?
Call you me daughter? now, I promise you
You have showd a tender fatherly regard,
To wish me wed to one half lunatic;
A mad-cup ruffian and a swearing Jack,
That thinks with oaths to face the matter out.
Father, tis thus: yourself and all the world,
That talkd of her, have talkd amiss of her:
If she be curst, it is for policy,
For shes not froward, but modest as the dove;
She is not hot, but temperate as the morn;
For patience she will prove a second Grissel,
And Roman Lucrece for her chastity:
And to conclude, we have greed so well together,
That upon Sunday is the wedding-day.
Ill see thee hangd on Sunday first.
Hark, Petruchio; she says shell see thee
hangd first.
Is this your speeding? nay, then, good night our part!
Be patient, gentlemen; I choose her for myself:
If she and I be pleased, whats that to you?
Tis bargaind twixt us twain, being alone,
That she shall still be curst in company.
I tell you, tis incredible to believe
How much she loves me: O, the kindest Kate!
She hung about my neck; and kiss on kiss
She vied so fast, protesting oath on oath,
That in a twink she won me to her love.
O, you are novices! tis a world to see,
How tame, when men and women are alone,
A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew.
Give me thy hand, Kate: I will unto Venice,
To buy apparel gainst the wedding-day.
Provide the feast, father, and bid the guests;
I will be sure my Katharina shall be fine.
I know not what to say: but give me your hands;
God send you joy, Petruchio! tis a match.
Amen, say we: we will be witnesses.
Father, and wife, and gentlemen, adieu;
I will to Venice; Sunday comes apace:
We will have rings and things and fine array;
And kiss me, Kate, we will be married oSunday.
Exeunt PETRUCHIO and KATHARINA severally
Was ever match clappd up so suddenly?
Faith, gentlemen, now I play a merchants part,
And venture madly on a desperate mart.
Twas a commodity lay fretting by you:
Twill bring you gain, or perish on the seas.
The gain I seek is, quiet in the match.
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch.
But now, Baptists, to your younger daughter:
Now is the day we long have looked for:
I am your neighbour, and was suitor first.
And I am one that love Bianca more
Than words can witness, or your thoughts can guess.
Youngling, thou canst not love so dear as I.
Graybeard, thy love doth freeze.
But thine doth fry.
Skipper, stand back: tis age that nourisheth.
But youth in ladies eyes that flourisheth.
Content you, gentlemen: I will compound this strife:
Tis deeds must win the prize; and he of both
That can assure my daughter greatest dower
Shall have my Biancas love.
Say, Signior Gremio, What can you assure her?
First, as you know, my house within the city
Is richly furnished with plate and gold;
Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands;
My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry;
In ivory coffers I have stuffd my crowns;
In cypress chests my arras counterpoints,
Costly apparel, tents, and canopies,
Fine linen, Turkey cushions bossd with pearl,
Valance of Venice gold in needlework,
Pewter and brass and all things that belong
To house or housekeeping: then, at my farm
I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail,
Sixscore fat oxen standing in my stalls,
And all things answerable to this portion.
Myself am struck in years, I must confess;
And if I die to-morrow, this is hers,
If whilst I live she will be only mine.
That only came well in. Sir, list to me:
I am my fathers heir and only son:
If I may have your daughter to my wife,
Ill leave her houses three or four as good,
Within rich Pisa walls, as any one
Old Signior Gremio has in Padua;
Besides two thousand ducats by the year
Of fruitful land, all which shall be her jointure.
What, have I pinchd you, Signior Gremio?
Two thousand ducats by the year of land!
My land amounts not to so much in all:
That she shall have; besides an argosy
That now is lying in Marseilles road.
What, have I choked you with an argosy?
Gremio, tis known my father hath no less
Than three great argosies; besides two galliases,
And twelve tight galleys: these I will assure her,
And twice as much, whateer thou offerst next.
Nay, I have offerd all, I have no more;
And she can have no more than all I have:
If you like me, she shall have me and mine.
Why, then the maid is mine from all the world,
By your firm promise: Gremio is out-vied.
I must confess your offer is the best;
And, let your father make her the assurance,
She is your own; else, you must pardon me,
if you should die before him, wheres her dower?
Thats but a cavil: he is old, I young.
And may not young men die, as well as old?
Well, gentlemen,
I am thus resolved: on Sunday next you know
My daughter Katharina is to be married:
Now, on the Sunday following, shall Bianca
Be bride to you, if you this assurance;
If not, Signior Gremio:
And so, I take my leave, and thank you both.
Adieu, good neighbour.
Exit BAPTISTA
Now I fear thee not:
Sirrah young gamester, your father were a fool
To give thee all, and in his waning age
Set foot under thy table: tut, a toy!
An old Italian fox is not so kind, my boy.
Exit
A vengeance on your crafty witherd hide!
Yet I have faced it with a card of ten.
Tis in my head to do my master good:
I see no reason but supposed Lucentio
Must get a father, calld supposed Vincentio;
And thats a wonder: fathers commonly
Do get their children; but in this case of wooing,
A child shall get a sire, if I fail not of my cunning.
Exit
ACT III
SCENE I. Padua. BAPTISTAS house.
Enter LUCENTIO, HORTENSIO, and BIANCA
Fiddler, forbear; you grow too forward, sir:
Have you so soon forgot the entertainment
Her sister Katharina welcomed you withal?
But, wrangling pedant, this is
The patroness of heavenly harmony:
Then give me leave to have prerogative;
And when in music we have spent an hour,
Your lecture shall have leisure for as much.
Preposterous ass, that never read so far
To know the cause why music was ordaind!
Was it not to refresh the mind of man
After his studies or his usual pain?
Then give me leave to read philosophy,
And while I pause, serve in your harmony.
Sirrah, I will not bear these braves of thine.
Why, gentlemen, you do me double wrong,
To strive for that which resteth in my choice:
I am no breeching scholar in the schools;
Ill not be tied to hours nor pointed times,
But learn my lessons as I please myself.
And, to cut off all strife, here sit we down:
Take you your instrument, play you the whiles;
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned.
Youll leave his lecture when I am in tune?
That will be never: tune your instrument.
Where left we last?
Here, madam:
Hic ibat Simois; hic est Sigeia tellus;
Hic steterat Priami regia celsa senis.
Construe them.
Hic ibat, as I told you before, Simois, I am
Lucentio, hic est, son unto Vincentio of Pisa,
Sigeia tellus, disguised thus to get your love;
Hic steterat, and that Lucentio that comes
a-wooing, Priami, is my man Tranio, regia,
bearing my port, celsa senis, that we might
beguile the old pantaloon.
Madam, my instruments in tune.
Lets hear. O fie! the treble jars.
Spit in the hole, man, and tune again.
Now let me see if I can construe it: Hic ibat
Simois, I know you not, hic est Sigeia tellus, I
trust you not; Hic steterat Priami, take heed
he hear us not, regia, presume not, celsa senis,
despair not.
Madam, tis now in tune.
All but the base.
The base is right; tis the base knave that jars.
Aside
How fiery and forward our pedant is!
Now, for my life, the knave doth court my love:
Pedascule, Ill watch you better yet.
In time I may believe, yet I mistrust.
Mistrust it not: for, sure, AEacides
Was Ajax, calld so from his grandfather.
I must believe my master; else, I promise you,
I should be arguing still upon that doubt:
But let it rest. Now, Licio, to you:
Good masters, take it not unkindly, pray,
That I have been thus pleasant with you both.
You may go walk, and give me leave a while:
My lessons make no music in three parts.
Are you so formal, sir? well, I must wait,
Aside
And watch withal; for, but I be deceived,
Our fine musician groweth amorous.
Madam, before you touch the instrument,
To learn the order of my fingering,
I must begin with rudiments of art;
To teach you gamut in a briefer sort,
More pleasant, pithy and effectual,
Than hath been taught by any of my trade:
And there it is in writing, fairly drawn.
Why, I am past my gamut long ago.
Yet read the gamut of Hortensio.
[Reads]  Gamut I am, the ground of all accord,
A re, to Plead Hortensios passion;
B mi, Bianca, take him for thy lord,
C fa ut, that loves with all affection:
D sol re, one clef, two notes have I:
E la mi, show pity, or I die.
Call you this gamut? tut, I like it not:
Old fashions please me best; I am not so nice,
To change true rules for old inventions.
Enter a Servant
Mistress, your father prays you leave your books
And help to dress your sisters chamber up:
You know to-morrow is the wedding-day.
Farewell, sweet masters both; I must be gone.
Exeunt BIANCA and Servant
Faith, mistress, then I have no cause to stay.
Exit
But I have cause to pry into this pedant:
Methinks he looks as though he were in love:
Yet if thy thoughts, Bianca, be so humble
To cast thy wandering eyes on every stale,
Seize thee that list: if once I find thee ranging,
Hortensio will be quit with thee by changing.
