A single thing, as I am now, that wonders
To hear thee speak of Naples. He does hear me;
And that he does I weep: myself am Naples,
Who with mine eyes, never since at ebb, beheld
The king my father wreckd.
Alack, for mercy!
Yes, faith, and all his lords; the Duke of Milan
And his brave son being twain.
[Aside]The Duke of Milan
And his more braver daughter could control thee,
If now twere fit to dot. At the first sight
They have changed eyes. Delicate Ariel,
Ill set thee free for this.
To FERDINAND
A word, good sir;
I fear you have done yourself some wrong: a word.
Why speaks my father so ungently? This
Is the third man that eer I saw, the first
That eer I sighd for: pity move my father
To be inclined my way!
O, if a virgin,
And your affection not gone forth, Ill make you
The queen of Naples.
Soft, sir! one word more.
Aside
They are both in eithers powers; but this swift business
I must uneasy make, lest too light winning
Make the prize light.
To FERDINAND
One word more; I charge thee
That thou attend me: thou dost here usurp
The name thou owest not; and hast put thyself
Upon this island as a spy, to win it
From me, the lord ont.
No, as I am a man.
Theres nothing ill can dwell in such a temple:
If the ill spirit have so fair a house,
Good things will strive to dwell witht.
Follow me.
Speak not you for him; hes a traitor. Come;
Ill manacle thy neck and feet together:
Sea-water shalt thou drink; thy food shall be
The fresh-brook muscles, witherd roots and husks
Wherein the acorn cradled. Follow.
No;
I will resist such entertainment till
Mine enemy has more power.
Draws, and is charmed from moving
O dear father,
Make not too rash a trial of him, for
Hes gentle and not fearful.
What? I say,
My foot my tutor? Put thy sword up, traitor;
Who makest a show but darest not strike, thy conscience
Is so possessd with guilt: come from thy ward,
For I can here disarm thee with this stick
And make thy weapon drop.
Beseech you, father.
Hence! hang not on my garments.
Sir, have pity;
Ill be his surety.
Silence! one word more
Shall make me chide thee, if not hate thee. What!
An advocate for an imposter! hush!
Thou thinkst there is no more such shapes as he,
Having seen but him and Caliban: foolish wench!
To the most of men this is a Caliban
And they to him are angels.
My affections
Are then most humble; I have no ambition
To see a goodlier man.
Come on; obey:
Thy nerves are in their infancy again
And have no vigour in them.
So they are;
My spirits, as in a dream, are all bound up.
My fathers loss, the weakness which I feel,
The wreck of all my friends, nor this mans threats,
To whom I am subdued, are but light to me,
Might I but through my prison once a day
Behold this maid: all corners else o the earth
Let liberty make use of; space enough
Have I in such a prison.
[Aside]                It works.
To FERDINAND
Come on.
Thou hast done well, fine Ariel!
To FERDINAND
Follow me.
To ARIEL
Hark what thou else shalt do me.
Be of comfort;
My fathers of a better nature, sir,
Than he appears by speech: this is unwonted
Which now came from him.
Thou shalt be free
As mountain winds: but then exactly do
All points of my command.
To the syllable.
Come, follow. Speak not for him.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Another part of the island.
Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, GONZALO, ADRIAN, FRANCISCO, and others
Beseech you, sir, be merry; you have cause,
So have we all, of joy; for our escape
Is much beyond our loss. Our hint of woe
Is common; every day some sailors wife,
The masters of some merchant and the merchant
Have just our theme of woe; but for the miracle,
I mean our preservation, few in millions
Can speak like us: then wisely, good sir, weigh
Our sorrow with our comfort.
Prithee, peace.
He receives comfort like cold porridge.
The visitor will not give him oer so.
Look hes winding up the watch of his wit;
by and by it will strike.
Sir,--
One: tell.
When every grief is entertaind thats offerd,
Comes to the entertainer--
A dollar.
Dolour comes to him, indeed: you
have spoken truer than you purposed.
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should.
Therefore, my lord,--
Fie, what a spendthrift is he of his tongue!
I prithee, spare.
Well, I have done: but yet,--
He will be talking.
Which, of he or Adrian, for a good
wager, first begins to crow?
The old cock.
The cockerel.
Done. The wager?
A laughter.
A match!
Though this island seem to be desert,--
Ha, ha, ha! So, youre paid.
Uninhabitable and almost inaccessible,--
Yet,--
Yet,--
He could not misst.
It must needs be of subtle, tender and delicate
temperance.
Temperance was a delicate wench.
Ay, and a subtle; as he most learnedly delivered.
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly.
As if it had lungs and rotten ones.
Or as twere perfumed by a fen.
Here is everything advantageous to life.
True; save means to live.
Of that theres none, or little.
How lush and lusty the grass looks! how green!
The ground indeed is tawny.
With an eye of green int.
He misses not much.
No; he doth but mistake the truth totally.
But the rarity of it is,--which is indeed almost
beyond credit,--
As many vouched rarities are.
That our garments, being, as they were, drenched in
the sea, hold notwithstanding their freshness and
glosses, being rather new-dyed than stained with
salt water.
If but one of his pockets could speak, would it not
say he lies?
Ay, or very falsely pocket up his report
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we
put them on first in Afric, at the marriage of
the kings fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis.
Twas a sweet marriage, and we prosper well in our return.
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to
their queen.
Not since widow Didos time.
Widow! a pox o that! How came that widow in?
widow Dido!
What if he had said widower AEneas too? Good Lord,
how you take it!
Widow Dido said you? you make me study of that:
she was of Carthage, not of Tunis.
This Tunis, sir, was Carthage.
Carthage?
I assure you, Carthage.
His word is more than the miraculous harp; he hath
raised the wall and houses too.
What impossible matter will he make easy next?
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket
and give it his son for an apple.
And, sowing the kernels of it in the sea, bring
forth more islands.
Ay.
Why, in good time.
Sir, we were talking that our garments seem now
as fresh as when we were at Tunis at the marriage
of your daughter, who is now queen.
And the rarest that eer came there.
Bate, I beseech you, widow Dido.
O, widow Dido! ay, widow Dido.
Is not, sir, my doublet as fresh as the first day I
wore it? I mean, in a sort.
That sort was well fished for.
When I wore it at your daughters marriage?
You cram these words into mine ears against
The stomach of my sense. Would I had never
Married my daughter there! for, coming thence,
My son is lost and, in my rate, she too,
Who is so far from Italy removed
I neer again shall see her. O thou mine heir
Of Naples and of Milan, what strange fish
Hath made his meal on thee?
Sir, he may live:
I saw him beat the surges under him,
And ride upon their backs; he trod the water,
Whose enmity he flung aside, and breasted
The surge most swoln that met him; his bold head
Bove the contentious waves he kept, and oard
Himself with his good arms in lusty stroke
To the shore, that oer his wave-worn basis bowd,
As stooping to relieve him: I not doubt
He came alive to land.
No, no, hes gone.
Sir, you may thank yourself for this great loss,
That would not bless our Europe with your daughter,
But rather lose her to an African;
Where she at least is banishd from your eye,
Who hath cause to wet the grief ont.
Prithee, peace.
You were kneeld to and importuned otherwise
By all of us, and the fair soul herself
Weighd between loathness and obedience, at
Which end o the beam should bow. We have lost your
son,
I fear, for ever: Milan and Naples have
More widows in them of this business making
Than we bring men to comfort them:
The faults your own.
So is the dearst o the loss.
My lord Sebastian,
The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness
And time to speak it in: you rub the sore,
When you should bring the plaster.
Very well.
And most chirurgeonly.
It is foul weather in us all, good sir,
When you are cloudy.
Foul weather?
Very foul.
Had I plantation of this isle, my lord,--
Held sowt with nettle-seed.
Or docks, or mallows.
And were the king ont, what would I do?
Scape being drunk for want of wine.
I the commonwealth I would by contraries
Execute all things; for no kind of traffic
Would I admit; no name of magistrate;
Letters should not be known; riches, poverty,
And use of service, none; contract, succession,
Bourn, bound of land, tilth, vineyard, none;
No use of metal, corn, or wine, or oil;
No occupation; all men idle, all;
And women too, but innocent and pure;
No sovereignty;--
Yet he would be king ont.
The latter end of his commonwealth forgets the
beginning.
All things in common nature should produce
Without sweat or endeavour: treason, felony,
Sword, pike, knife, gun, or need of any engine,
Would I not have; but nature should bring forth,
Of its own kind, all foison, all abundance,
To feed my innocent people.
No marrying mong his subjects?
None, man; all idle: whores and knaves.
I would with such perfection govern, sir,
To excel the golden age.
God save his majesty!
Long live Gonzalo!
And,--do you mark me, sir?
Prithee, no more: thou dost talk nothing to me.
I do well believe your highness; and
did it to minister occasion to these gentlemen,
who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that
they always use to laugh at nothing.
Twas you we laughed at.
Who in this kind of merry fooling am nothing
to you: so you may continue and laugh at
nothing still.
What a blow was there given!
An it had not fallen flat-long.
You are gentlemen of brave metal; you would lift
the moon out of her sphere, if she would continue
in it five weeks without changing.
Enter ARIEL, invisible, playing solemn music
We would so, and then go a bat-fowling.
Nay, good my lord, be not angry.
No, I warrant you; I will not adventure
my discretion so weakly. Will you laugh
me asleep, for I am very heavy?
Go sleep, and hear us.
All sleep except ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, and ANTONIO
What, all so soon asleep! I wish mine eyes
Would, with themselves, shut up my thoughts: I find
They are inclined to do so.
Please you, sir,
Do not omit the heavy offer of it:
It seldom visits sorrow; when it doth,
It is a comforter.
We two, my lord,
Will guard your person while you take your rest,
And watch your safety.
Thank you. Wondrous heavy.
ALONSO sleeps. Exit ARIEL
What a strange drowsiness possesses them!
It is the quality o the climate.
Why
Doth it not then our eyelids sink? I find not
Myself disposed to sleep.
Nor I; my spirits are nimble.
They fell together all, as by consent;
They droppd, as by a thunder-stroke. What might,
Worthy Sebastian? O, what might?--No more:--
And yet me thinks I see it in thy face,
What thou shouldst be: the occasion speaks thee, and
My strong imagination sees a crown
Dropping upon thy head.
What, art thou waking?
Do you not hear me speak?
I do; and surely
It is a sleepy language and thou speakst
Out of thy sleep. What is it thou didst say?
This is a strange repose, to be asleep
With eyes wide open; standing, speaking, moving,
And yet so fast asleep.
Noble Sebastian,
Thou letst thy fortune sleep--die, rather; winkst
Whiles thou art waking.
Thou dost snore distinctly;
Theres meaning in thy snores.
I am more serious than my custom: you
Must be so too, if heed me; which to do
Trebles thee oer.
Well, I am standing water.
Ill teach you how to flow.
Do so: to ebb
Hereditary sloth instructs me.
O,
If you but knew how you the purpose cherish
Whiles thus you mock it! how, in stripping it,
You more invest it! Ebbing men, indeed,
Most often do so near the bottom run
By their own fear or sloth.
Prithee, say on:
The setting of thine eye and cheek proclaim
A matter from thee, and a birth indeed
Which throes thee much to yield.
Thus, sir:
Although this lord of weak remembrance, this,
Who shall be of as little memory
When he is earthd, hath here almost persuade,--
For hes a spirit of persuasion, only
Professes to persuade,--the king his sons alive,
Tis as impossible that hes undrownd
And he that sleeps here swims.
I have no hope
That hes undrownd.
O, out of that no hope
What great hope have you! no hope that way is
Another way so high a hope that even
Ambition cannot pierce a wink beyond,
But doubt discovery there. Will you grant with me
That Ferdinand is drownd?
Hes gone.
Then, tell me,
Whos the next heir of Naples?
Claribel.
She that is queen of Tunis; she that dwells
Ten leagues beyond mans life; she that from Naples
Can have no note, unless the sun were post--
The man i the moons too slow--till new-born chins
Be rough and razorable; she that--from whom?
We all were sea-swallowd, though some cast again,
And by that destiny to perform an act
Whereof whats past is prologue, what to come
In yours and my discharge.
What stuff is this! how say you?
Tis true, my brothers daughters queen of Tunis;
So is she heir of Naples; twixt which regions
There is some space.
A space whose every cubit
Seems to cry out, How shall that Claribel
Measure us back to Naples? Keep in Tunis,
And let Sebastian wake. Say, this were death
That now hath seized them; why, they were no worse
Than now they are. There be that can rule Naples
As well as he that sleeps; lords that can prate
As amply and unnecessarily
As this Gonzalo; I myself could make
A chough of as deep chat. O, that you bore
The mind that I do! what a sleep were this
For your advancement! Do you understand me?
Methinks I do.
And how does your content
Tender your own good fortune?
I remember
You did supplant your brother Prospero.
True:
And look how well my garments sit upon me;
Much feater than before: my brothers servants
Were then my fellows; now they are my men.
But, for your conscience?
Ay, sir; where lies that? if twere a kibe,
Twould put me to my slipper: but I feel not
This deity in my bosom: twenty consciences,
That stand twixt me and Milan, candied be they
And melt ere they molest! Here lies your brother,
No better than the earth he lies upon,
If he were that which now hes like, thats dead;
Whom I, with this obedient steel, three inches of it,
Can lay to bed for ever; whiles you, doing thus,
To the perpetual wink for aye might put
This ancient morsel, this Sir Prudence, who
Should not upbraid our course. For all the rest,
Theyll take suggestion as a cat laps milk;
Theyll tell the clock to any business that
We say befits the hour.
Thy case, dear friend,
Shall be my precedent; as thou gotst Milan,
Ill come by Naples. Draw thy sword: one stroke
Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest;
And I the king shall love thee.
Draw together;
And when I rear my hand, do you the like,
To fall it on Gonzalo.
O, but one word.
They talk apart
Re-enter ARIEL, invisible
My master through his art foresees the danger
That you, his friend, are in; and sends me forth--
For else his project dies--to keep them living.
Sings in GONZALOs ear
While you here do snoring lie,
Open-eyed conspiracy
His time doth take.
If of life you keep a care,
Shake off slumber, and beware:
Awake, awake!
Then let us both be sudden.
Now, good angels
Preserve the king.
They wake
Why, how now? ho, awake! Why are you drawn?
Wherefore this ghastly looking?
Whats the matter?
Whiles we stood here securing your repose,
Even now, we heard a hollow burst of bellowing
Like bulls, or rather lions: didt not wake you?
It struck mine ear most terribly.
I heard nothing.
O, twas a din to fright a monsters ear,
To make an earthquake! sure, it was the roar
Of a whole herd of lions.
Heard you this, Gonzalo?
Upon mine honour, sir, I heard a humming,
And that a strange one too, which did awake me:
I shaked you, sir, and cried: as mine eyes opend,
I saw their weapons drawn: there was a noise,
Thats verily. Tis best we stand upon our guard,
Or that we quit this place; lets draw our weapons.
Lead off this ground; and lets make further search
For my poor son.
Heavens keep him from these beasts!
For he is, sure, i the island.
Lead away.
Prospero my lord shall know what I have done:
So, king, go safely on to seek thy son.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Another part of the island.
Enter CALIBAN with a burden of wood. A noise of thunder heard
All the infections that the sun sucks up
From bogs, fens, flats, on Prosper fall and make him
By inch-meal a disease! His spirits hear me
And yet I needs must curse. But theyll nor pinch,
Fright me with urchin--shows, pitch me i the mire,
Nor lead me, like a firebrand, in the dark
Out of my way, unless he bid em; but
For every trifle are they set upon me;
Sometime like apes that mow and chatter at me
And after bite me, then like hedgehogs which
Lie tumbling in my barefoot way and mount
Their pricks at my footfall; sometime am I
All wound with adders who with cloven tongues
Do hiss me into madness.
Enter TRINCULO
Lo, now, lo!
Here comes a spirit of his, and to torment me
For bringing wood in slowly. Ill fall flat;
Perchance he will not mind me.
Heres neither bush nor shrub, to bear off
any weather at all, and another storm brewing;
I hear it sing i the wind: yond same black
cloud, yond huge one, looks like a foul
bombard that would shed his liquor. If it
should thunder as it did before, I know not
where to hide my head: yond same cloud cannot
choose but fall by pailfuls. What have we
here? a man or a fish? dead or alive? A fish:
he smells like a fish; a very ancient and fish-
like smell; a kind of not of the newest Poor-
John. A strange fish! Were I in England now,
as once I was, and had but this fish painted,
not a holiday fool there but would give a piece
of silver: there would this monster make a
man; any strange beast there makes a man:
when they will not give a doit to relieve a lame
beggar, they will lazy out ten to see a dead
Indian. Legged like a man and his fins like
arms! Warm o my troth! I do now let loose
my opinion; hold it no longer: this is no fish,
but an islander, that hath lately suffered by a
thunderbolt.
Thunder
Alas, the storm is come again! my best way is to
creep under his gaberdine; there is no other
shelter hereabouts: misery acquaints a man with
strange bed-fellows. I will here shroud till the
dregs of the storm be past.
Enter STEPHANO, singing: a bottle in his hand
I shall no more to sea, to sea,
Here shall I die ashore--
This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a mans
funeral: well, heres my comfort.
Drinks
Sings
The master, the swabber, the boatswain and I,
The gunner and his mate
Loved Mall, Meg and Marian and Margery,
But none of us cared for Kate;
For she had a tongue with a tang,
Would cry to a sailor, Go hang!
She loved not the savour of tar nor of pitch,
Yet a tailor might scratch her whereer she did itch:
Then to sea, boys, and let her go hang!
This is a scurvy tune too: but heres my comfort.
Drinks
Do not torment me: Oh!
Whats the matter? Have we devils here? Do you put
tricks upons with savages and men of Ind, ha? I
have not scaped drowning to be afeard now of your
four legs; for it hath been said, As proper a man as
ever went on four legs cannot make him give ground;
and it shall be said so again while Stephano
breathes ats nostrils.
The spirit torments me; Oh!
This is some monster of the isle with four legs, who
hath got, as I take it, an ague. Where the devil
should he learn our language? I will give him some
relief, if it be but for that. if I can recover him
and keep him tame and get to Naples with him, hes a
present for any emperor that ever trod on neats leather.
Do not torment me, prithee; Ill bring my wood home faster.
Hes in his fit now and does not talk after the
wisest. He shall taste of my bottle: if he have
never drunk wine afore will go near to remove his
fit. If I can recover him and keep him tame, I will
not take too much for him; he shall pay for him that
hath him, and that soundly.
Thou dost me yet but little hurt; thou wilt anon, I
know it by thy trembling: now Prosper works upon thee.
Come on your ways; open your mouth; here is that
which will give language to you, cat: open your
mouth; this will shake your shaking, I can tell you,
and that soundly: you cannot tell whos your friend:
open your chaps again.
I should know that voice: it should be--but he is
drowned; and these are devils: O defend me!
Four legs and two voices: a most delicate monster!
His forward voice now is to speak well of his
friend; his backward voice is to utter foul speeches
and to detract. If all the wine in my bottle will
recover him, I will help his ague. Come. Amen! I
will pour some in thy other mouth.
Stephano!
Doth thy other mouth call me? Mercy, mercy! This is
a devil, and no monster: I will leave him; I have no
long spoon.
Stephano! If thou beest Stephano, touch me and
speak to me: for I am Trinculo--be not afeard--thy
good friend Trinculo.
If thou beest Trinculo, come forth: Ill pull thee
by the lesser legs: if any be Trinculos legs,
these are they. Thou art very Trinculo indeed! How
camest thou to be the siege of this moon-calf? can
he vent Trinculos?
I took him to be killed with a thunder-stroke. But
art thou not drowned, Stephano? I hope now thou art
not drowned. Is the storm overblown? I hid me
under the dead moon-calfs gaberdine for fear of
the storm. And art thou living, Stephano? O
Stephano, two Neapolitans scaped!
Prithee, do not turn me about; my stomach is not constant.
[Aside]  These be fine things, an if they be
not sprites.
Thats a brave god and bears celestial liquor.
I will kneel to him.
How didst thou scape? How camest thou hither?
swear by this bottle how thou camest hither. I
escaped upon a butt of sack which the sailors
heaved oerboard, by this bottle; which I made of
the bark of a tree with mine own hands since I was
cast ashore.
Ill swear upon that bottle to be thy true subject;
for the liquor is not earthly.
Here; swear then how thou escapedst.
Swum ashore. man, like a duck: I can swim like a
duck, Ill be sworn.
Here, kiss the book. Though thou canst swim like a
duck, thou art made like a goose.
O Stephano. hast any more of this?
The whole butt, man: my cellar is in a rock by the
sea-side where my wine is hid. How now, moon-calf!
how does thine ague?
Hast thou not droppd from heaven?
Out o the moon, I do assure thee: I was the man i
the moon when time was.
I have seen thee in her and I do adore thee:
My mistress showd me thee and thy dog and thy bush.
Come, swear to that; kiss the book: I will furnish
it anon with new contents swear.
By this good light, this is a very shallow monster!
I afeard of him! A very weak monster! The man i
the moon! A most poor credulous monster! Well
drawn, monster, in good sooth!
Ill show thee every fertile inch o th island;
And I will kiss thy foot: I prithee, be my god.
By this light, a most perfidious and drunken
monster! when s gods asleep, hell rob his bottle.
Ill kiss thy foot; Ill swear myself thy subject.
Come on then; down, and swear.
I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed
monster. A most scurvy monster! I could find in my
heart to beat him,--
Come, kiss.
But that the poor monsters in drink: an abominable monster!
Ill show thee the best springs; Ill pluck thee berries;
Ill fish for thee and get thee wood enough.
A plague upon the tyrant that I serve!
Ill bear him no more sticks, but follow thee,
Thou wondrous man.
A most ridiculous monster, to make a wonder of a
Poor drunkard!
I prithee, let me bring thee where crabs grow;
And I with my long nails will dig thee pignuts;
Show thee a jays nest and instruct thee how
To snare the nimble marmoset; Ill bring thee
To clustering filberts and sometimes Ill get thee
Young scamels from the rock. Wilt thou go with me?
I prithee now, lead the way without any more
talking. Trinculo, the king and all our company
else being drowned, we will inherit here: here;
bear my bottle: fellow Trinculo, well fill him by
and by again.
[Sings drunkenly]
Farewell master; farewell, farewell!
A howling monster: a drunken monster!
No more dams Ill make for fish
Nor fetch in firing
At requiring;
Nor scrape trencher, nor wash dish
Ban, Ban, Cacaliban
Has a new master: get a new man.
Freedom, hey-day! hey-day, freedom! freedom,
hey-day, freedom!
O brave monster! Lead the way.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. Before PROSPEROS Cell.
Enter FERDINAND, bearing a log
There be some sports are painful, and their labour
Delight in them sets off: some kinds of baseness
Are nobly undergone and most poor matters
Point to rich ends. This my mean task
Would be as heavy to me as odious, but
The mistress which I serve quickens whats dead
And makes my labours pleasures: O, she is
Ten times more gentle than her fathers crabbed,
And hes composed of harshness. I must remove
Some thousands of these logs and pile them up,
Upon a sore injunction: my sweet mistress
Weeps when she sees me work, and says, such baseness
Had never like executor. I forget:
But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labours,
Most busy lest, when I do it.
Enter MIRANDA; and PROSPERO at a distance, unseen
Alas, now, pray you,
Work not so hard: I would the lightning had
Burnt up those logs that you are enjoind to pile!
Pray, set it down and rest you: when this burns,
Twill weep for having wearied you. My father
Is hard at study; pray now, rest yourself;
Hes safe for these three hours.
O most dear mistress,
The sun will set before I shall discharge
What I must strive to do.
If youll sit down,
Ill bear your logs the while: pray, give me that;
Ill carry it to the pile.
No, precious creature;
I had rather crack my sinews, break my back,
Than you should such dishonour undergo,
While I sit lazy by.
It would become me
As well as it does you: and I should do it
With much more ease; for my good will is to it,
And yours it is against.
Poor worm, thou art infected!
This visitation shows it.
You look wearily.
No, noble mistress;tis fresh morning with me
When you are by at night. I do beseech you--
Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers--
What is your name?
Miranda.--O my father,
I have broke your hest to say so!
Admired Miranda!
Indeed the top of admiration! worth
Whats dearest to the world! Full many a lady
I have eyed with best regard and many a time
The harmony of their tongues hath into bondage
Brought my too diligent ear: for several virtues
Have I liked several women; never any
With so fun soul, but some defect in her
Did quarrel with the noblest grace she owed
And put it to the foil: but you, O you,
So perfect and so peerless, are created
Of every creatures best!
I do not know
One of my sex; no womans face remember,
Save, from my glass, mine own; nor have I seen
More that I may call men than you, good friend,
And my dear father: how features are abroad,
I am skilless of; but, by my modesty,
The jewel in my dower, I would not wish
Any companion in the world but you,
Nor can imagination form a shape,
Besides yourself, to like of. But I prattle
Something too wildly and my fathers precepts
I therein do forget.
I am in my condition
A prince, Miranda; I do think, a king;
I would, not so!--and would no more endure
This wooden slavery than to suffer
The flesh-fly blow my mouth. Hear my soul speak:
The very instant that I saw you, did
My heart fly to your service; there resides,
To make me slave to it; and for your sake
Am I this patient log--man.
Do you love me?
O heaven, O earth, bear witness to this sound
And crown what I profess with kind event
If I speak true! if hollowly, invert
What best is boded me to mischief! I
Beyond all limit of what else i the world
Do love, prize, honour you.
I am a fool
To weep at what I am glad of.
Fair encounter
Of two most rare affections! Heavens rain grace
On that which breeds between em!
Wherefore weep you?
At mine unworthiness that dare not offer
What I desire to give, and much less take
What I shall die to want. But this is trifling;
And all the more it seeks to hide itself,
The bigger bulk it shows. Hence, bashful cunning!
And prompt me, plain and holy innocence!
I am your wife, if you will marry me;
If not, Ill die your maid: to be your fellow
You may deny me; but Ill be your servant,
Whether you will or no.
My mistress, dearest;
And I thus humble ever.
My husband, then?
Ay, with a heart as willing
As bondage eer of freedom: heres my hand.
And mine, with my heart int; and now farewell
Till half an hour hence.
A thousand thousand!
Exeunt FERDINAND and MIRANDA severally
So glad of this as they I cannot be,
Who are surprised withal; but my rejoicing
At nothing can be more. Ill to my book,
For yet ere supper-time must I perform
Much business appertaining.
Exit
SCENE II. Another part of the island.
Enter CALIBAN, STEPHANO, and TRINCULO
Tell not me; when the butt is out, we will drink
water; not a drop before: therefore bear up, and
board em. Servant-monster, drink to me.
Servant-monster! the folly of this island! They
say theres but five upon this isle: we are three
of them; if th other two be brained like us, the
state totters.
Drink, servant-monster, when I bid thee: thy eyes
are almost set in thy head.
Where should they be set else? he were a brave
monster indeed, if they were set in his tail.
My man-monster hath drownd his tongue in sack:
for my part, the sea cannot drown me; I swam, ere I
could recover the shore, five and thirty leagues off
and on. By this light, thou shalt be my lieutenant,
monster, or my standard.
Your lieutenant, if you list; hes no standard.
Well not run, Monsieur Monster.
Nor go neither; but youll lie like dogs and yet say
nothing neither.
Moon-calf, speak once in thy life, if thou beest a
good moon-calf.
How does thy honour? Let me lick thy shoe.
Ill not serve him; hes not valiant.
Thou liest, most ignorant monster: I am in case to
justle a constable. Why, thou deboshed fish thou,
was there ever man a coward that hath drunk so much
sack as I to-day? Wilt thou tell a monstrous lie,
being but half a fish and half a monster?
Lo, how he mocks me! wilt thou let him, my lord?
Lord quoth he! That a monster should be such a natural!
Lo, lo, again! bite him to death, I prithee.
Trinculo, keep a good tongue in your head: if you
prove a mutineer,--the next tree! The poor monsters
my subject and he shall not suffer indignity.
I thank my noble lord. Wilt thou be pleased to
hearken once again to the suit I made to thee?
Marry, will Ikneel and repeat it; I will stand,
and so shall Trinculo.
Enter ARIEL, invisible
As I told thee before, I am subject to a tyrant, a
sorcerer, that by his cunning hath cheated me of the island.
Thou liest.
Thou liest, thou jesting monkey, thou: I would my
valiant master would destroy thee! I do not lie.
Trinculo, if you trouble him any more ins tale, by
this hand, I will supplant some of your teeth.
Why, I said nothing.
Mum, then, and no more. Proceed.
I say, by sorcery he got this isle;
From me he got it. if thy greatness will
Revenge it on him,--for I know thou darest,
But this thing dare not,--
Thats most certain.
Thou shalt be lord of it and Ill serve thee.
How now shall this be compassed?
Canst thou bring me to the party?
Yea, yea, my lord: Ill yield him thee asleep,
Where thou mayst knock a nail into his bead.
Thou liest; thou canst not.
What a pied ninnys this! Thou scurvy patch!
I do beseech thy greatness, give him blows
And take his bottle from him: when thats gone
He shall drink nought but brine; for Ill not show him
Where the quick freshes are.
Trinculo, run into no further danger:
interrupt the monster one word further, and,
by this hand, Ill turn my mercy out o doors
and make a stock-fish of thee.
Why, what did I? I did nothing. Ill go farther
off.
Didst thou not say he lied?
Thou liest.
Do I so? take thou that.
Beats TRINCULO
As you like this, give me the lie another time.
I did not give the lie. Out o your
wits and bearing too? A pox o your bottle!
this can sack and drinking do. A murrain on
your monster, and the devil take your fingers!
Ha, ha, ha!
Now, forward with your tale. Prithee, stand farther
off.
Beat him enough: after a little time
Ill beat him too.
Stand farther. Come, proceed.
Why, as I told thee, tis a custom with him,
I th afternoon to sleep: there thou mayst brain him,
Having first seized his books, or with a log
Batter his skull, or paunch him with a stake,
Or cut his wezand with thy knife. Remember
First to possess his books; for without them
Hes but a sot, as I am, nor hath not
One spirit to command: they all do hate him
As rootedly as I. Burn but his books.
He has brave utensils,--for so he calls them--
Which when he has a house, hell deck withal
And that most deeply to consider is
The beauty of his daughter; he himself
Calls her a nonpareil: I never saw a woman,
But only Sycorax my dam and she;
But she as far surpasseth Sycorax
As greatst does least.
Is it so brave a lass?
Ay, lord; she will become thy bed, I warrant.
And bring thee forth brave brood.
Monster, I will kill this man: his daughter and I
will be king and queen--save our graces!--and
Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys. Dost thou
like the plot, Trinculo?
Excellent.
Give me thy hand: I am sorry I beat thee; but,
while thou livest, keep a good tongue in thy head.
Within this half hour will he be asleep:
Wilt thou destroy him then?
Ay, on mine honour.
This will I tell my master.
Thou makest me merry; I am full of pleasure:
Let us be jocund: will you troll the catch
You taught me but while-ere?
At thy request, monster, I will do reason, any
reason. Come on, Trinculo, let us sing.
Sings
Flout em and scout em
And scout em and flout em
Thought is free.
Thats not the tune.
Ariel plays the tune on a tabour and pipe
What is this same?
This is the tune of our catch, played by the picture
of Nobody.
If thou beest a man, show thyself in thy likeness:
if thou beest a devil, taket as thou list.
O, forgive me my sins!
He that dies pays all debts: I defy thee. Mercy upon us!
Art thou afeard?
No, monster, not I.
Be not afeard; the isle is full of noises,
Sounds and sweet airs, that give delight and hurt not.
Sometimes a thousand twangling instruments
Will hum about mine ears, and sometime voices
That, if I then had waked after long sleep,
Will make me sleep again: and then, in dreaming,
The clouds methought would open and show riches
Ready to drop upon me that, when I waked,
I cried to dream again.
This will prove a brave kingdom to me, where I shall
have my music for nothing.
When Prospero is destroyed.
That shall be by and by: I remember the story.
The sound is going away; lets follow it, and
after do our work.
Lead, monster; well follow. I would I could see
this tabourer; he lays it on.
Wilt come? Ill follow, Stephano.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Another part of the island.
Enter ALONSO, SEBASTIAN, ANTONIO, GONZALO, ADRIAN, FRANCISCO, and others
Byr lakin, I can go no further, sir;
My old bones ache: heres a maze trod indeed
Through forth-rights and meanders! By your patience,
I needs must rest me.
Old lord, I cannot blame thee,
Who am myself attachd with weariness,
To the dulling of my spirits: sit down, and rest.
Even here I will put off my hope and keep it
No longer for my flatterer: he is drownd
Whom thus we stray to find, and the sea mocks
Our frustrate search on land. Well, let him go.
[Aside to SEBASTIAN]  I am right glad that hes so
out of hope.
Do not, for one repulse, forego the purpose
That you resolved to effect.
[Aside to ANTONIO]  The next advantage
Will we take throughly.
[Aside to SEBASTIAN]  Let it be to-night;
For, now they are oppressd with travel, they
Will not, nor cannot, use such vigilance
As when they are fresh.
[Aside to ANTONIO]  I say, to-night: no more.
Solemn and strange music
What harmony is this? My good friends, hark!
Marvellous sweet music!
Enter PROSPERO above, invisible. Enter several  strange Shapes, bringing in a banquet;  they dance about it with gentle actions of  salutation; and, inviting the King,  and c. to eat, they depart
Give us kind keepers, heavens! What were these?
A living drollery. Now I will believe
That there are unicorns, that in Arabia
There is one tree, the phoenix throne, one phoenix
At this hour reigning there.
Ill believe both;
And what does else want credit, come to me,
And Ill be sworn tis true: travellers neer did
lie,
Though fools at home condemn em.
If in Naples
I should report this now, would they believe me?
If I should say, I saw such islanders--
For, certes, these are people of the island--
Who, though they are of monstrous shape, yet, note,
Their manners are more gentle-kind than of
Our human generation you shall find
Many, nay, almost any.
