Till you hear further from me.
The gods preserve ye!
Well fare you, gentleman: give me your hand;
We must needs dine together. Sir, your jewel
Hath sufferd under praise.
What, my lord! dispraise?
A more satiety of commendations.
If I should pay you fort as tis extolld,
It would unclew me quite.
My lord, tis rated
As those which sell would give: but you well know,
Things of like value differing in the owners
Are prized by their masters: believet, dear lord,
You mend the jewel by the wearing it.
Well mockd.
No, my good lord; he speaks the common tongue,
Which all men speak with him.
Look, who comes here: will you be chid?
Enter APEMANTUS
Jeweller: Well bear, with your lordship.
Hell spare none.
Good morrow to thee, gentle Apemantus!
Till I be gentle, stay thou for thy good morrow;
When thou art Timons dog, and these knaves honest.
Why dost thou call them knaves? thou knowst them not.
Are they not Athenians?
Yes.
Then I repent not.
Jeweller: You know me, Apemantus?
Thou knowst I do: I calld thee by thy name.
Thou art proud, Apemantus.
Of nothing so much as that I am not like Timon.
Whither art going?
To knock out an honest Athenians brains.
Thats a deed thoult die for.
Right, if doing nothing be death by the law.
How likest thou this picture, Apemantus?
The best, for the innocence.
Wrought he not well that painted it?
He wrought better that made the painter; and yet
hes but a filthy piece of work.
Youre a dog.
Thy mothers of my generation: whats she, if I be a dog?
Wilt dine with me, Apemantus?
No; I eat not lords.
An thou shouldst, thou ldst anger ladies.
O, they eat lords; so they come by great bellies.
Thats a lascivious apprehension.
So thou apprehendest it: take it for thy labour.
How dost thou like this jewel, Apemantus?
Not so well as plain-dealing, which will not cost a
man a doit.
What dost thou think tis worth?
Not worth my thinking. How now, poet!
How now, philosopher!
Thou liest.
Art not one?
Yes.
Then I lie not.
Art not a poet?
Yes.
Then thou liest: look in thy last work, where thou
hast feigned him a worthy fellow.
Thats not feigned; he is so.
Yes, he is worthy of thee, and to pay thee for thy
labour: he that loves to be flattered is worthy o
the flatterer. Heavens, that I were a lord!
What wouldst do then, Apemantus?
Een as Apemantus does now; hate a lord with my heart.
What, thyself?
Ay.
Wherefore?
That I had no angry wit to be a lord.
Art not thou a merchant?
Ay, Apemantus.
Traffic confound thee, if the gods will not!
If traffic do it, the gods do it.
Traffics thy god; and thy god confound thee!
Trumpet sounds. Enter a Messenger
What trumpets that?
Tis Alcibiades, and some twenty horse,
All of companionship.
Pray, entertain them; give them guide to us.
Exeunt some Attendants
You must needs dine with me: go not you hence
Till I have thankd you: when dinners done,
Show me this piece. I am joyful of your sights.
Enter ALCIBIADES, with the rest
Most welcome, sir!
So, so, there!
Aches contract and starve your supple joints!
That there should be small love mongst these
sweet knaves,
And all this courtesy! The strain of mans bred out
Into baboon and monkey.
Sir, you have saved my longing, and I feed
Most hungerly on your sight.
Right welcome, sir!
Ere we depart, well share a bounteous time
In different pleasures. Pray you, let us in.
Exeunt all except APEMANTUS
Enter two Lords
What time o day ist, Apemantus?
Time to be honest.
That time serves still.
The more accursed thou, that still omittst it.
Thou art going to Lord Timons feast?
Ay, to see meat fill knaves and wine heat fools.
Fare thee well, fare thee well.
Thou art a fool to bid me farewell twice.
Why, Apemantus?
Shouldst have kept one to thyself, for I mean to
give thee none.
Hang thyself!
No, I will do nothing at thy bidding: make thy
requests to thy friend.
Away, unpeaceable dog, or Ill spurn thee hence!
I will fly, like a dog, the heels o the ass.
Exit
Hes opposite to humanity. Come, shall we in,
And taste Lord Timons bounty? he outgoes
The very heart of kindness.
He pours it out; Plutus, the god of gold,
Is but his steward: no meed, but he repays
Sevenfold above itself; no gift to him,
But breeds the giver a return exceeding
All use of quittance.
The noblest mind he carries
That ever governd man.
Long may he live in fortunes! Shall we in?
Ill keep you company.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A banqueting-room in Timons house.
Hautboys playing loud music. A great banquet  served in; FLAVIUS and others attending; then enter  TIMON, ALCIBIADES, Lords, Senators, and VENTIDIUS.  Then comes, dropping, after all, APEMANTUS, discontentedly, like himself
Most honourd Timon,
It hath pleased the gods to remember my fathers age,
And call him to long peace.
He is gone happy, and has left me rich:
Then, as in grateful virtue I am bound
To your free heart, I do return those talents,
Doubled with thanks and service, from whose help
I derived liberty.
O, by no means,
Honest Ventidius; you mistake my love:
I gave it freely ever; and theres none
Can truly say he gives, if he receives:
If our betters play at that game, we must not dare
To imitate them; faults that are rich are fair.
A noble spirit!
Nay, my lords,
They all stand ceremoniously looking on TIMON
Ceremony was but devised at first
To set a gloss on faint deeds, hollow welcomes,
Recanting goodness, sorry ere tis shown;
But where there is true friendship, there needs none.
Pray, sit; more welcome are ye to my fortunes
Than my fortunes to me.
They sit
My lord, we always have confessd it.
Ho, ho, confessd it! hangd it, have you not?
O, Apemantus, you are welcome.
No;
You shall not make me welcome:
I come to have thee thrust me out of doors.
Fie, thourt a churl; yeve got a humour there
Does not become a man: tis much to blame.
They say, my lords, ira furor brevis est; but yond
man is ever angry. Go, let him have a table by
himself, for he does neither affect company, nor is
he fit fort, indeed.
Let me stay at thine apperil, Timon: I come to
observe; I give thee warning ont.
I take no heed of thee; thourt an Athenian,
therefore welcome: I myself would have no power;
prithee, let my meat make thee silent.
I scorn thy meat; twould choke me, for I should
neer flatter thee. O you gods, what a number of
men eat Timon, and he sees em not! It grieves me
to see so many dip their meat in one mans blood;
and all the madness is, he cheers them up too.
I wonder men dare trust themselves with men:
Methinks they should invite them without knives;
Good for their meat, and safer for their lives.
Theres much example fort; the fellow that sits
next him now, parts bread with him, pledges the
breath of him in a divided draught, is the readiest
man to kill him: t has been proved. If I were a
huge man, I should fear to drink at meals;
Lest they should spy my windpipes dangerous notes:
Great men should drink with harness on their throats.
My lord, in heart; and let the health go round.
Let it flow this way, my good lord.
Flow this way! A brave fellow! he keeps his tides
well. Those healths will make thee and thy state
look ill, Timon. Heres that which is too weak to
be a sinner, honest water, which neer left man i the mire:
This and my food are equals; theres no odds:
Feasts are too proud to give thanks to the gods.
Apemantus grace.
Immortal gods, I crave no pelf;
I pray for no man but myself:
Grant I may never prove so fond,
To trust man on his oath or bond;
Or a harlot, for her weeping;
Or a dog, that seems a-sleeping:
Or a keeper with my freedom;
Or my friends, if I should need em.
Amen. So fall tot:
Rich men sin, and I eat root.
Eats and drinks
Much good dich thy good heart, Apemantus!
Captain Alcibiades, your hearts in the field now.
My heart is ever at your service, my lord.
You had rather be at a breakfast of enemies than a
dinner of friends.
So the were bleeding-new, my lord, theres no meat
like em: I could wish my best friend at such a feast.
Would all those fatterers were thine enemies then,
that then thou mightst kill em and bid me to em!
Might we but have that happiness, my lord, that you
would once use our hearts, whereby we might express
some part of our zeals, we should think ourselves
for ever perfect.
O, no doubt, my good friends, but the gods
themselves have provided that I shall have much help
from you: how had you been my friends else? why
have you that charitable title from thousands, did
not you chiefly belong to my heart? I have told
more of you to myself than you can with modesty
speak in your own behalf; and thus far I confirm
you. O you gods, think I, what need we have any
friends, if we should neer have need of em? they
were the most needless creatures living, should we
neer have use for em, and would most resemble
sweet instruments hung up in cases that keep their
sounds to themselves. Why, I have often wished
myself poorer, that I might come nearer to you. We
are born to do benefits: and what better or
properer can we can our own than the riches of our
friends? O, what a precious comfort tis, to have
so many, like brothers, commanding one anothers
fortunes! O joy, een made away ere t can be born!
Mine eyes cannot hold out water, methinks: to
forget their faults, I drink to you.
Thou weepest to make them drink, Timon.
Joy had the like conception in our eyes
And at that instant like a babe sprung up.
Ho, ho! I laugh to think that babe a bastard.
I promise you, my lord, you moved me much.
Much!
Tucket, within
What means that trump?
Enter a Servant
How now?
Please you, my lord, there are certain
ladies most desirous of admittance.
Ladies! what are their wills?
There comes with them a forerunner, my lord, which
bears that office, to signify their pleasures.
I pray, let them be admitted.
Enter Cupid
Hail to thee, worthy Timon, and to all
That of his bounties taste! The five best senses
Acknowledge thee their patron; and come freely
To gratulate thy plenteous bosom: th ear,
Taste, touch and smell, pleased from thy tale rise;
They only now come but to feast thine eyes.
Theyre welcome all; let em have kind admittance:
Music, make their welcome!
Exit Cupid
You see, my lord, how ample youre beloved.
Music. Re-enter Cupid with a mask of Ladies  as Amazons, with lutes in their hands, dancing and playing
Hoy-day, what a sweep of vanity comes this way!
They dance! they are mad women.
Like madness is the glory of this life.
As this pomp shows to a little oil and root.
We make ourselves fools, to disport ourselves;
And spend our flatteries, to drink those men
Upon whose age we void it up again,
With poisonous spite and envy.
Who lives thats not depraved or depraves?
Who dies, that bears not one spurn to their graves
Of their friends gift?
I should fear those that dance before me now
Would one day stamp upon me: t has been done;
Men shut their doors against a setting sun.
The Lords rise from table, with much adoring of  TIMON; and to show their loves, each singles out an  Amazon, and all dance, men with women, a lofty strain or two to the hautboys, and cease
You have done our pleasures much grace, fair ladies,
Set a fair fashion on our entertainment,
Which was not half so beautiful and kind;
You have added worth unto t and lustre,
And entertaind me with mine own device;
I am to thank you for t.
My lord, you take us even at the best.
Faith, for the worst is filthy; and would not hold
taking, I doubt me.
Ladies, there is an idle banquet attends you:
Please you to dispose yourselves.
Most thankfully, my lord.
Exeunt Cupid and Ladies
Flavius.
My lord?
The little casket bring me hither.
Yes, my lord. More jewels yet!
There is no crossing him in s humour;
Aside
Else I should tell him,--well, i faith I should,
When alls spent, he ld be crossd then, an he could.
Tis pity bounty had not eyes behind,
That man might neer be wretched for his mind.
Exit
Where be our men?
Here, my lord, in readiness.
Our horses!
Re-enter FLAVIUS, with the casket
O my friends,
I have one word to say to you: look you, my good lord,
I must entreat you, honour me so much
As to advance this jewel; accept it and wear it,
Kind my lord.
I am so far already in your gifts,--
So are we all.
Enter a Servant
My lord, there are certain nobles of the senate
Newly alighted, and come to visit you.
They are fairly welcome.
I beseech your honour,
Vouchsafe me a word; it does concern you near.
Near! why then, another time Ill hear thee:
I prithee, lets be provided to show them
entertainment.
[Aside]  I scarce know how.
Enter a Second Servant
May it please your honour, Lord Lucius,
Out of his free love, hath presented to you
Four milk-white horses, trappd in silver.
I shall accept them fairly; let the presents
Be worthily entertaind.
Enter a third Servant
How now! what news?
Please you, my lord, that honourable
gentleman, Lord Lucullus, entreats your company
to-morrow to hunt with him, and has sent your honour
two brace of greyhounds.
Ill hunt with him; and let them be received,
Not without fair reward.
[Aside]                What will this come to?
He commands us to provide, and give great gifts,
And all out of an empty coffer:
Nor will he know his purse, or yield me this,
To show him what a beggar his heart is,
Being of no power to make his wishes good:
His promises fly so beyond his state
That what he speaks is all in debt; he owes
For every word: he is so kind that he now
Pays interest for t; his lands put to their books.
Well, would I were gently put out of office
Before I were forced out!
Happier is he that has no friend to feed
Than such that do een enemies exceed.
I bleed inwardly for my lord.
Exit
You do yourselves
Much wrong, you bate too much of your own merits:
Here, my lord, a trifle of our love.
With more than common thanks I will receive it.
O, hes the very soul of bounty!
And now I remember, my lord, you gave
Good words the other day of a bay courser
I rode on: it is yours, because you liked it.
O, I beseech you, pardon me, my lord, in that.
You may take my word, my lord; I know, no man
Can justly praise but what he does affect:
I weigh my friends affection with mine own;
Ill tell you true. Ill call to you.
O, none so welcome.
I take all and your several visitations
So kind to heart, tis not enough to give;
Methinks, I could deal kingdoms to my friends,
And neer be weary. Alcibiades,
Thou art a soldier, therefore seldom rich;
It comes in charity to thee: for all thy living
Is mongst the dead, and all the lands thou hast
Lie in a pitchd field.
Ay, defiled land, my lord.
We are so virtuously bound--
And so
Am I to you.
So infinitely endeard--
All to you. Lights, more lights!
The best of happiness,
Honour and fortunes, keep with you, Lord Timon!
Ready for his friends.
Exeunt all but APEMANTUS and TIMON
What a coils here!
Serving of becks and jutting-out of bums!
I doubt whether their legs be worth the sums
That are given for em. Friendships full of dregs:
Methinks, false hearts should never have sound legs,
Thus honest fools lay out their wealth on courtsies.
Now, Apemantus, if thou wert not sullen, I would be
good to thee.
No, Ill nothing: for if I should be bribed too,
there would be none left to rail upon thee, and then
thou wouldst sin the faster. Thou givest so long,
Timon, I fear me thou wilt give away thyself in
paper shortly: what need these feasts, pomps and
vain-glories?
Nay, an you begin to rail on society once, I am
sworn not to give regard to you. Farewell; and come
with better music.
Exit
So:
Thou wilt not hear me now; thou shalt not then:
Ill lock thy heaven from thee.
O, that mens ears should be
To counsel deaf, but not to flattery!
Exit
ACT II
SCENE I. A Senators house.
Enter Senator, with papers in his hand
And late, five thousand: to Varro and to Isidore
He owes nine thousand; besides my former sum,
Which makes it five and twenty. Still in motion
Of raging waste? It cannot hold; it will not.
If I want gold, steal but a beggars dog,
And give it Timon, why, the dog coins gold.
If I would sell my horse, and buy twenty more
Better than he, why, give my horse to Timon,
Ask nothing, give it him, it foals me, straight,
And able horses. No porter at his gate,
But rather one that smiles and still invites
All that pass by. It cannot hold: no reason
Can found his state in safety. Caphis, ho!
Caphis, I say!
Enter CAPHIS
Here, sir; what is your pleasure?
Get on your cloak, and haste you to Lord Timon;
Importune him for my moneys; be not ceased
With slight denial, nor then silenced when--
Commend me to your master--and the cap
Plays in the right hand, thus: but tell him,
My uses cry to me, I must serve my turn
Out of mine own; his days and times are past
And my reliances on his fracted dates
Have smit my credit: I love and honour him,
But must not break my back to heal his finger;
Immediate are my needs, and my relief
Must not be tossd and turnd to me in words,
But find supply immediate. Get you gone:
Put on a most importunate aspect,
A visage of demand; for, I do fear,
When every feather sticks in his own wing,
Lord Timon will be left a naked gull,
Which flashes now a phoenix. Get you gone.
I go, sir.
I go, sir!--Take the bonds along with you,
And have the dates in contempt.
I will, sir.
Go.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. A hall in Timons house.
Enter FLAVIUS, with many bills in his hand
No care, no stop! so senseless of expense,
That he will neither know how to maintain it,
Nor cease his flow of riot: takes no account
How things go from him, nor resumes no care
Of what is to continue: never mind
Was to be so unwise, to be so kind.
What shall be done? he will not hear, till feel:
I must be round with him, now he comes from hunting.
Fie, fie, fie, fie!
Enter CAPHIS, and the Servants of Isidore and Varro
Good even, Varro: what,
You come for money?
Varros ServantIst not your business too?
It is: and yours too, Isidore?
Isidores ServantIt is so.
Would we were all discharged!
Varros ServantI fear it.
Here comes the lord.
Enter TIMON, ALCIBIADES, and Lords,  and c
So soon as dinners done, well forth again,
My Alcibiades. With me? what is your will?
My lord, here is a note of certain dues.
Dues! Whence are you?
Of Athens here, my lord.
Go to my steward.
Please it your lordship, he hath put me off
To the succession of new days this month:
My master is awaked by great occasion
To call upon his own, and humbly prays you
That with your other noble parts youll suit
In giving him his right.
Mine honest friend,
I prithee, but repair to me next morning.
Nay, good my lord,--
Contain thyself, good friend.
Varros ServantOne Varros servant, my good lord,--
Isidores ServantFrom Isidore;
He humbly prays your speedy payment.
If you did know, my lord, my masters wants--
Varros ServantTwas due on forfeiture, my lord, six weeks And past.
Isidores Servant         Your steward puts me off, my lord;
And I am sent expressly to your lordship.
Give me breath.
I do beseech you, good my lords, keep on;
Ill wait upon you instantly.
Exeunt ALCIBIADES and Lords
To FLAVIUS
Come hither: pray you,
How goes the world, that I am thus encounterd
With clamourous demands of date-broke bonds,
And the detention of long-since-due debts,
Against my honour?
Please you, gentlemen,
The time is unagreeable to this business:
Your importunacy cease till after dinner,
That I may make his lordship understand
Wherefore you are not paid.
Do so, my friends. See them well entertaind.
Exit
Pray, draw near.
Exit
Enter APEMANTUS and Fool
Stay, stay, here comes the fool with Apemantus:
lets ha some sport with em.
Varros ServantHang him, hell abuse us.
Isidores ServantA plague upon him, dog!
Varros ServantHow dost, fool?
Dost dialogue with thy shadow?
Varros ServantI speak not to thee.
No,tis to thyself.
To the Fool
Come away.
Isidores ServantTheres the fool hangs on your back already.
No, thou standst single, thourt not on him yet.
Wheres the fool now?
He last asked the question. Poor rogues, and
usurers men! bawds between gold and want!
What are we, Apemantus?
Asses.
Why?
That you ask me what you are, and do not know
yourselves. Speak to em, fool.
How do you, gentlemen?
Gramercies, good fool: how does your mistress?
Shes een setting on water to scald such chickens
as you are. Would we could see you at Corinth!
Good! gramercy.
Enter Page
Look you, here comes my mistress page.
[To the Fool]  Why, how now, captain! what do you
in this wise company? How dost thou, Apemantus?
Would I had a rod in my mouth, that I might answer
thee profitably.
Prithee, Apemantus, read me the superscription of
these letters: I know not which is which.
Canst not read?
No.
There will little learning die then, that day thou
art hanged. This is to Lord Timon; this to
Alcibiades. Go; thou wast born a bastard, and thout
die a bawd.
Thou wast whelped a dog, and thou shalt famish a
dogs death. Answer not; I am gone.
Exit
Een so thou outrunnest grace. Fool, I will go with
you to Lord Timons.
Will you leave me there?
If Timon stay at home. You three serve three usurers?
Ay; would they served us!
So would I,--as good a trick as ever hangman served thief.
Are you three usurers men?
Ay, fool.
I think no usurer but has a fool to his servant: my
mistress is one, and I am her fool. When men come
to borrow of your masters, they approach sadly, and
go away merry; but they enter my mistress house
merrily, and go away sadly: the reason of this?
Varros ServantI could render one.
Do it then, that we may account thee a whoremaster
and a knave; which not-withstanding, thou shalt be
no less esteemed.
Varros ServantWhat is a whoremaster, fool?
A fool in good clothes, and something like thee.
Tis a spirit: sometimet appears like a lord;
sometime like a lawyer; sometime like a philosopher,
with two stones moe thans artificial one: he is
very often like a knight; and, generally, in all
shapes that man goes up and down in from fourscore
to thirteen, this spirit walks in.
Varros ServantThou art not altogether a fool.
Nor thou altogether a wise man: as much foolery as
I have, so much wit thou lackest.
That answer might have become Apemantus.
Aside, aside; here comes Lord Timon.
Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS
Come with me, fool, come.
I do not always follow lover, elder brother and
woman; sometime the philosopher.
Exeunt APEMANTUS and Fool
Pray you, walk near: Ill speak with you anon.
Exeunt Servants
You make me marvel: wherefore ere this time
Had you not fully laid my state before me,
That I might so have rated my expense,
As I had leave of means?
You would not hear me,
At many leisures I proposed.
Go to:
Perchance some single vantages you took.
When my indispos ition put you back:
And that unaptness made your minister,
Thus to excuse yourself.
O my good lord,
At many times I brought in my accounts,
Laid them before you; you would throw them off,
And say, you found them in mine honesty.
When, for some trifling present, you have bid me
Return so much, I have shook my head and wept;
Yea, gainst the authority of manners, prayd you
To hold your hand more close: I did endure
Not seldom, nor no slight cheques, when I have
Prompted you in the ebb of your estate
And your great flow of debts. My loved lord,
Though you hear now, too late--yet nows a time--
The greatest of your having lacks a half
To pay your present debts.
Let all my land be sold.
Tis all engaged, some forfeited and gone;
And what remains will hardly stop the mouth
Of present dues: the future comes apace:
What shall defend the interim? and at length
How goes our reckoning?
To Lacedaemon did my land extend.
O my good lord, the world is but a word:
Were it all yours to give it in a breath,
How quickly were it gone!
You tell me true.
If you suspect my husbandry or falsehood,
Call me before the exactest auditors
And set me on the proof. So the gods bless me,
When all our offices have been oppressd
With riotous feeders, when our vaults have wept
With drunken spilth of wine, when every room
Hath blazed with lights and brayd with minstrelsy,
I have retired me to a wasteful cock,
And set mine eyes at flow.
Prithee, no more.
Heavens, have I said, the bounty of this lord!
How many prodigal bits have slaves and peasants
This night englutted! Who is not Timons?
What heart, head, sword, force, means, but is
Lord Timons?
Great Timon, noble, worthy, royal Timon!
Ah, when the means are gone that buy this praise,
The breath is gone whereof this praise is made:
Feast-won, fast-lost; one cloud of winter showers,
These flies are couchd.
Come, sermon me no further:
No villanous bounty yet hath passd my heart;
Unwisely, not ignobly, have I given.
Why dost thou weep? Canst thou the conscience lack,
To think I shall lack friends? Secure thy heart;
If I would broach the vessels of my love,
And try the argument of hearts by borrowing,
Men and mens fortunes could I frankly use
As I can bid thee speak.
Assurance bless your thoughts!
And, in some sort, these wants of mine are crownd,
That I account them blessings; for by these
Shall I try friends: you shall perceive how you
Mistake my fortunes; I am wealthy in my friends.
Within there! Flaminius! Servilius!
Enter FLAMINIUS, SERVILIUS, and other Servants
My lord? my lord?
I will dispatch you severally; you to Lord Lucius;
to Lord Lucullus you: I hunted with his honour
to-day: you, to Sempronius: commend me to their
loves, and, I am proud, say, that my occasions have
found time to use em toward a supply of money: let
the request be fifty talents.
As you have said, my lord.
[Aside]  Lord Lucius and Lucullus? hum!
Go you, sir, to the senators--
Of whom, even to the states best health, I have
Deserved this hearing--bid em send o the instant
A thousand talents to me.
I have been bold--
For that I knew it the most general way--
To them to use your signet and your name;
But they do shake their heads, and I am here
No richer in return.
Ist true? cant be?
They answer, in a joint and corporate voice,
That now they are at fall, want treasure, cannot
Do what they would; are sorry--you are honourable,--
But yet they could have wishd--they know not--
Something hath been amiss--a noble nature
May catch a wrench--would all were well--tis pity;--
And so, intending other serious matters,
After distasteful looks and these hard fractions,
With certain half-caps and cold-moving nods
They froze me into silence.
You gods, reward them!
Prithee, man, look cheerly. These old fellows
Have their ingratitude in them hereditary:
Their blood is caked, tis cold, it seldom flows;
Tis lack of kindly warmth they are not kind;
And nature, as it grows again toward earth,
Is fashiond for the journey, dull and heavy.
To a Servant
Go to Ventidius.
To FLAVIUS
Prithee, be not sad,
Thou art true and honest; ingeniously I speak.
No blame belongs to thee.
To Servant
Ventidius lately
Buried his father; by whose death hes steppd
Into a great estate: when he was poor,
Imprisond and in scarcity of friends,
I cleard him with five talents: greet him from me;
Bid him suppose some good necessity
Touches his friend, which craves to be rememberd
With those five talents.
Exit Servant
To FLAVIUS
That had, givet these fellows
To whom tis instant due. Neer speak, or think,
That Timons fortunes mong his friends can sink.
I would I could not think it: that thought is
bountys foe;
Being free itself, it thinks all others so.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. A room in Lucullus house.
FLAMINIUS waiting. Enter a Servant to him
I have told my lord of you; he is coming down to you.
I thank you, sir.
Enter LUCULLUS
Heres my lord.
[Aside]  One of Lord Timons men? a gift, I
warrant. Why, this hits right; I dreamt of a silver
basin and ewer to-night. Flaminius, honest
Flaminius; you are very respectively welcome, sir.
Fill me some wine.
Exit Servants
And how does that honourable, complete, free-hearted
gentleman of Athens, thy very bountiful good lord
and master?
His health is well sir.
I am right glad that his health is well, sir: and
what hast thou there under thy cloak, pretty Flaminius?
Faith, nothing but an empty box, sir; which, in my
lords behalf, I come to entreat your honour to
supply; who, having great and instant occasion to
use fifty talents, hath sent to your lordship to
furnish him, nothing doubting your present
assistance therein.
La, la, la, la! nothing doubting, says he? Alas,
good lord! a noble gentleman tis, if he would not
keep so good a house. Many a time and often I ha
dined with him, and told him ont, and come again to
supper to him, of purpose to have him spend less,
and yet he would embrace no counsel, take no warning
by my coming. Every man has his fault, and honesty
is his: I ha told him ont, but I could neer get
him fromt.
Re-enter Servant, with wine
Please your lordship, here is the wine.
Flaminius, I have noted thee always wise. Heres to thee.
Your lordship speaks your pleasure.
I have observed thee always for a towardly prompt
spirit--give thee thy due--and one that knows what
belongs to reason; and canst use the time well, if
the time use thee well: good parts in thee.
To Servant
Get you gone, sirrah.
Exit Servant
Draw nearer, honest Flaminius. Thy lords a
bountiful gentleman: but thou art wise; and thou
knowest well enough, although thou comest to me,
that this is no time to lend money, especially upon
bare friendship, without security. Heres three
solidares for thee: good boy, wink at me, and say
thou sawest me not. Fare thee well.
Ist possible the world should so much differ,
And we alive that lived? Fly, damned baseness,
To him that worships thee!
Throwing the money back
Ha! now I see thou art a fool, and fit for thy master.
Exit
May these add to the number that may scald thee!
Let moulten coin be thy damnation,
Thou disease of a friend, and not himself!
Has friendship such a faint and milky heart,
It turns in less than two nights? O you gods,
I feel masters passion! this slave,
Unto his honour, has my lords meat in him:
Why should it thrive and turn to nutriment,
When he is turnd to poison?
O, may diseases only work upont!
And, when hes sick to death, let not that part of nature
Which my lord paid for, be of any power
To expel sickness, but prolong his hour!
Exit
SCENE II. A public place.
Enter LUCILIUS, with three Strangers
Who, the Lord Timon? he is my very good friend, and
an honourable gentleman.
We know him for no less, though we are but strangers
to him. But I can tell you one thing, my lord, and
which I hear from common rumours: now Lord Timons
happy hours are done and past, and his estate
shrinks from him.
Fie, no, do not believe it; he cannot want for money.
But believe you this, my lord, that, not long ago,
one of his men was with the Lord Lucullus to borrow
so many talents, nay, urged extremely fort and
showed what necessity belonged tot, and yet was denied.
How!
I tell you, denied, my lord.
What a strange case was that! now, before the gods,
I am ashamed ont. Denied that honourable man!
there was very little honour showed int. For my own
part, I must needs confess, I have received some
small kindnesses from him, as money, plate, jewels
and such-like trifles, nothing comparing to his;
yet, had he mistook him and sent to me, I should
neer have denied his occasion so many talents.
Enter SERVILIUS
See, by good hap, yonders my lord;
I have sweat to see his honour. My honoured lord,--
To LUCIUS
Servilius! you are kindly met, sir. Fare thee well:
commend me to thy honourable virtuous lord, my very
exquisite friend.
May it please your honour, my lord hath sent--
Ha! what has he sent? I am so much endeared to
that lord; hes ever sending: how shall I thank
him, thinkest thou? And what has he sent now?
Has only sent his present occasion now, my lord;
requesting your lordship to supply his instant use
with so many talents.
I know his lordship is but merry with me;
He cannot want fifty five hundred talents.
But in the mean time he wants less, my lord.
If his occasion were not virtuous,
I should not urge it half so faithfully.
Dost thou speak seriously, Servilius?
Upon my soul,tis true, sir.
What a wicked beast was I to disfurnish myself
against such a good time, when I might ha shown
myself honourable! how unluckily it happened, that I
should purchase the day before for a little part,
and undo a great deal of honoured! Servilius, now,
before the gods, I am not able to do,--the more
beast, I say:--I was sending to use Lord Timon
myself, these gentlemen can witness! but I would
not, for the wealth of Athens, I had donet now.
Commend me bountifully to his good lordship; and I
hope his honour will conceive the fairest of me,
because I have no power to be kind: and tell him
this from me, I count it one of my greatest
afflictions, say, that I cannot pleasure such an
honourable gentleman. Good Servilius, will you
befriend me so far, as to use mine own words to him?
Yes, sir, I shall.
Ill look you out a good turn, Servilius.
Exit SERVILIUS
True as you said, Timon is shrunk indeed;
And he thats once denied will hardly speed.
Exit
Do you observe this, Hostilius?
Ay, too well.
Why, this is the worlds soul; and just of the
same piece
Is every flatterers spirit. Who can call him
His friend that dips in the same dish? for, in
My knowing, Timon has been this lords father,
And kept his credit with his purse,
Supported his estate; nay, Timons money
Has paid his men their wages: he neer drinks,
But Timons silver treads upon his lip;
And yet--O, see the monstrousness of man
When he looks out in an ungrateful shape!--
He does deny him, in respect of his,
What charitable men afford to beggars.
Religion groans at it.
For mine own part,
I never tasted Timon in my life,
Nor came any of his bounties over me,
To mark me for his friend; yet, I protest,
For his right noble mind, illustrious virtue
And honourable carriage,
Had his necessity made use of me,
I would have put my wealth into donation,
And the best half should have returnd to him,
So much I love his heart: but, I perceive,
Men must learn now with pity to dispense;
For policy sits above conscience.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A room in Sempronius house.
Enter SEMPRONIUS, and a Servant of TIMONs
Must he needs trouble me in t,--hum!--bove
all others?
He might have tried Lord Lucius or Lucullus;
And now Ventidius is wealthy too,
Whom he redeemd from prison: all these
Owe their estates unto him.
My lord,
They have all been touchd and found base metal, for
They have au denied him.
How! have they denied him?
Has Ventidius and Lucullus denied him?
And does he send to me? Three? hum!
It shows but little love or judgment in him:
Must I be his last refuge! His friends, like
physicians,
Thrive, give him over: must I take the cure upon me?
Has much disgraced me int; Im angry at him,
That might have known my place: I see no sense fort,
But his occasion might have wood me first;
For, in my conscience, I was the first man
That eer received gift from him:
And does he think so backwardly of me now,
That Ill requite its last? No:
So it may prove an argument of laughter
To the rest, and mongst lords I be thought a fool.
Ild rather than the worth of thrice the sum,
Had sent to me first, but for my minds sake;
Id such a courage to do him good. But now return,
And with their faint reply this answer join;
Who bates mine honour shall not know my coin.
Exit
Excellent! Your lordships a goodly villain. The
devil knew not what he did when he made man
politic; he crossed himself by t: and I cannot
think but, in the end, the villainies of man will
set him clear. How fairly this lord strives to
appear foul! takes virtuous copies to be wicked,
like those that under hot ardent zeal would set
whole realms on fire: Of such a nature is his
politic love.
This was my lords best hope; now all are fled,
Save only the gods: now his friends are dead,
Doors, that were neer acquainted with their wards
Many a bounteous year must be employd
Now to guard sure their master.
And this is all a liberal course allows;
Who cannot keep his wealth must keep his house.
Exit
SCENE IV. The same. A hall in Timons house.
Enter two Servants of Varro, and the Servant of  LUCIUS, meeting TITUS, HORTENSIUS, and other Servants of TIMONs creditors, waiting his coming out
Varros
Well met; good morrow, Titus and Hortensius.
The like to you kind Varro.
Lucius!
What, do we meet together?
Lucilius ServantAy, and I think
One business does command us all; for mine Is money.
So is theirs and ours.
Enter PHILOTUS
Lucilius ServantAnd Sir Philotus too!
Good day at once.
Lucilius Servant                  Welcome, good brother.
What do you think the hour?
Labouring for nine.
Lucilius ServantSo much?
Is not my lord seen yet?
Lucilius ServantNot yet.
I wonder ont; he was wont to shine at seven.
Lucilius ServantAy, but the days are waxd shorter with him:
You must consider that a prodigal course
Is like the suns; but not, like his, recoverable.
I fear tis deepest winter in Lord Timons purse;
That is one may reach deep enough, and yet
Find little.
I am of your fear for that.
Ill show you how to observe a strange event.
Your lord sends now for money.
Most true, he does.
And he wears jewels now of Timons gift,
For which I wait for money.
It is against my heart.
Lucilius ServantMark, how strange it shows,
Timon in this should pay more than he owes:
And een as if your lord should wear rich jewels,
And send for money for em.
Im weary of this charge, the gods can witness:
I know my lord hath spent of Timons wealth,
And now ingratitude makes it worse than stealth.
Varros
Yes, mines three thousand crowns: whats yours?
Lucilius ServantFive thousand mine.
Varros
Tis much deep: and it should seem by the sun,
Your masters confidence was above mine;
