Else, surely, his had equalld.
Enter FLAMINIUS.
One of Lord Timons men.
Lucilius ServantFlaminius! Sir, a word: pray, is my lord ready to
come forth?
No, indeed, he is not.
We attend his lordship; pray, signify so much.
I need not tell him that; he knows you are too diligent.
Exit
Enter FLAVIUS in a cloak, muffled
Lucilius ServantHa! is not that his steward muffled so?
He goes away in a cloud: call him, call him.
Do you hear, sir?
Varros
By your leave, sir,--
What do ye ask of me, my friend?
We wait for certain money here, sir.
Ay,
If money were as certain as your waiting,
Twere sure enough.
Why then preferrd you not your sums and bills,
When your false masters eat of my lords meat?
Then they could smile and fawn upon his debts
And take down the interest into their
gluttonous maws.
You do yourselves but wrong to stir me up;
Let me pass quietly:
Believe t, my lord and I have made an end;
I have no more to reckon, he to spend.
Lucilius ServantAy, but this answer will not serve.
If twill not serve,tis not so base as you;
For you serve knaves.
Exit
Varros
How! what does his cashiered worship mutter?
Varros
No matter what; hes poor, and thats revenge
enough. Who can speak broader than he that has no
house to put his head in? such may rail against
great buildings.
Enter SERVILIUS
O, heres Servilius; now we shall know some answer.
If I might beseech you, gentlemen, to repair some
other hour, I should derive much fromt; for,
taket of my soul, my lord leans wondrously to
discontent: his comfortable temper has forsook him;
hes much out of health, and keeps his chamber.
Lucilius Servant: Many do keep their chambers are not sick:
And, if it be so far beyond his health,
Methinks he should the sooner pay his debts,
And make a clear way to the gods.
Good gods!
We cannot take this for answer, sir.
[Within]  Servilius, help! My lord! my lord!
Enter TIMON, in a rage, FLAMINIUS following
What, are my doors opposed against my passage?
Have I been ever free, and must my house
Be my retentive enemy, my gaol?
The place which I have feasted, does it now,
Like all mankind, show me an iron heart?
Lucilius ServantPut in now, Titus.
My lord, here is my bill.
Lucilius ServantHeres mine.
And mine, my lord.
Both
Varros ServantsAnd ours, my lord.
All our bills.
Knock me down with em: cleave me to the girdle.
Lucilius ServantAlas, my lord,-
Cut my heart in sums.
Mine, fifty talents.
Tell out my blood.
Lucilius ServantFive thousand crowns, my lord.
Five thousand drops pays that.
What yours?--and yours?
Varros
My lord,--
Varros
My lord,--
Tear me, take me, and the gods fall upon you!
Exit
Faith, I perceive our masters may throw their caps
at their money: these debts may well be called
desperate ones, for a madman owes em.
Exeunt
Re-enter TIMON and FLAVIUS
They have een put my breath from me, the slaves.
Creditors? devils!
My dear lord,--
What if it should be so?
My lord,--
Ill have it so. My steward!
Here, my lord.
So fitly? Go, bid all my friends again,
Lucius, Lucullus, and Sempronius:
All, sirrah, all:
Ill once more feast the rascals.
O my lord,
You only speak from your distracted soul;
There is not so much left, to furnish out
A moderate table.
Bet not in thy care; go,
I charge thee, invite them all: let in the tide
Of knaves once more; my cook and Ill provide.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The same. The senate-house. The Senate sitting.
My lord, you have my voice to it; the faults
Bloody; tis necessary he should die:
Nothing emboldens sin so much as mercy.
Most true; the law shall bruise him.
Enter ALCIBIADES, with Attendants
Honour, health, and compassion to the senate!
Now, captain?
I am an humble suitor to your virtues;
For pity is the virtue of the law,
And none but tyrants use it cruelly.
It pleases time and fortune to lie heavy
Upon a friend of mine, who, in hot blood,
Hath steppd into the law, which is past depth
To those that, without heed, do plunge into t.
He is a man, setting his fate aside,
Of comely virtues:
Nor did he soil the fact with cowardice--
An honour in him which buys out his fault--
But with a noble fury and fair spirit,
Seeing his reputation touchd to death,
He did oppose his foe:
And with such sober and unnoted passion
He did behave his anger, ere twas spent,
As if he had but proved an argument.
You undergo too strict a paradox,
Striving to make an ugly deed look fair:
Your words have took such pains as if they labourd
To bring manslaughter into form and set quarrelling
Upon the head of valour; which indeed
Is valour misbegot and came into the world
When sects and factions were newly born:
Hes truly valiant that can wisely suffer
The worst that man can breathe, and make his wrongs
His outsides, to wear them like his raiment,
carelessly,
And neer prefer his injuries to his heart,
To bring it into danger.
If wrongs be evils and enforce us kill,
What folly tis to hazard life for ill!
My lord,--
You cannot make gross sins look clear:
To revenge is no valour, but to bear.
My lords, then, under favour, pardon me,
If I speak like a captain.
Why do fond men expose themselves to battle,
And not endure all threats? sleep upont,
And let the foes quietly cut their throats,
Without repugnancy? If there be
Such valour in the bearing, what make we
Abroad? why then, women are more valiant
That stay at home, if bearing carry it,
And the ass more captain than the lion, the felon
Loaden with irons wiser than the judge,
If wisdom be in suffering. O my lords,
As you are great, be pitifully good:
Who cannot condemn rashness in cold blood?
To kill, I grant, is sins extremest gust;
But, in defence, by mercy, tis most just.
To be in anger is impiety;
But who is man that is not angry?
Weigh but the crime with this.
You breathe in vain.
In vain! his service done
At Lacedaemon and Byzantium
Were a sufficient briber for his life.
Whats that?
I say, my lords, he has done fair service,
And slain in fight many of your enemies:
How full of valour did he bear himself
In the last conflict, and made plenteous wounds!
He has made too much plenty with em;
Hes a sworn rioter: he has a sin that often
Drowns him, and takes his valour prisoner:
If there were no foes, that were enough
To overcome him: in that beastly fury
He has been known to commit outrages,
And cherish factions: tis inferrd to us,
His days are foul and his drink dangerous.
He dies.
Hard fate! he might have died in war.
My lords, if not for any parts in him--
Though his right arm might purchase his own time
And be in debt to none--yet, more to move you,
Take my deserts to his, and join em both:
And, for I know your reverend ages love
Security, Ill pawn my victories, all
My honours to you, upon his good returns.
If by this crime he owes the law his life,
Why, let the war receive t in valiant gore
For law is strict, and war is nothing more.
We are for law: he dies; urge it no more,
On height of our displeasure: friend or brother,
He forfeits his own blood that spills another.
Must it be so? it must not be. My lords,
I do beseech you, know me.
How!
Call me to your remembrances.
What!
I cannot think but your age has forgot me;
It could not else be, I should prove so base,
To sue, and be denied such common grace:
My wounds ache at you.
Do you dare our anger?
Tis in few words, but spacious in effect;
We banish thee for ever.
Banish me!
Banish your dotage; banish usury,
That makes the senate ugly.
If, after two days shine, Athens contain thee,
Attend our weightier judgment. And, not to swell
our spirit,
He shall be executed presently.
Exeunt Senators
Now the gods keep you old enough; that you may live
Only in bone, that none may look on you!
Im worse than mad: I have kept back their foes,
While they have told their money and let out
Their coin upon large interest, I myself
Rich only in large hurts. All those for this?
Is this the balsam that the usuring senate
Pours into captains wounds? Banishment!
It comes not ill; I hate not to be banishd;
It is a cause worthy my spleen and fury,
That I may strike at Athens. Ill cheer up
My discontented troops, and lay for hearts.
Tis honour with most lands to be at odds;
Soldiers should brook as little wrongs as gods.
Exit
SCENE VI. The same. A banqueting-room in Timons house.
Music. Tables set out: Servants attending.  Enter divers Lords, Senators and others, at several doors
The good time of day to you, sir.
I also wish it to you. I think this honourable lord
did but try us this other day.
Upon that were my thoughts tiring, when we
encountered: I hope it is not so low with him as
he made it seem in the trial of his several friends.
It should not be, by the persuasion of his new feasting.
I should think so: he hath sent me an earnest
inviting, which many my near occasions did urge me
to put off; but he hath conjured me beyond them, and
I must needs appear.
In like manner was I in debt to my importunate
business, but he would not hear my excuse. I am
sorry, when he sent to borrow of me, that my
provision was out.
I am sick of that grief too, as I understand how all
things go.
Every man heres so. What would he have borrowed of
you?
A thousand pieces.
A thousand pieces!
What of you?
He sent to me, sir,--Here he comes.
Enter TIMON and Attendants
With all my heart, gentlemen both; and how fare you?
Ever at the best, hearing well of your lordship.
The swallow follows not summer more willing than we
your lordship.
[Aside]  Nor more willingly leaves winter; such
summer-birds are men. Gentlemen, our dinner will not
recompense this long stay: feast your ears with the
music awhile, if they will fare so harshly o the
trumpets sound; we shall to t presently.
I hope it remains not unkindly with your lordship
that I returned you an empty messenger.
O, sir, let it not trouble you.
My noble lord,--
Ah, my good friend, what cheer?
My most honourable lord, I am een sick of shame,
that, when your lordship this other day sent to me,
I was so unfortunate a beggar.
Think not on t, sir.
If you had sent but two hours before,--
Let it not cumber your better remembrance.
The banquet brought in
Come, bring in all together.
All covered dishes!
Royal cheer, I warrant you.
Doubt not that, if money and the season can yield
it.
How do you? Whats the news?
Alcibiades is banished: hear you of it?
Alcibiades banished!
Tis so, be sure of it.
How! how!
I pray you, upon what?
My worthy friends, will you draw near?
Ill tell you more anon. Heres a noble feast toward.
This is the old man still.
Will t hold? will t hold?
It does: but time will--and so--
I do conceive.
Each man to his stool, with that spur as he would to
the lip of his mistress: your diet shall be in all
places alike. Make not a city feast of it, to let
the meat cool ere we can agree upon the first place:
sit, sit. The gods require our thanks.
You great benefactors, sprinkle our society with
thankfulness. For your own gifts, make yourselves
praised: but reserve still to give, lest your
deities be despised. Lend to each man enough, that
one need not lend to another; for, were your
godheads to borrow of men, men would forsake the
gods. Make the meat be beloved more than the man
that gives it. Let no assembly of twenty be without
a score of villains: if there sit twelve women at
the table, let a dozen of them be--as they are. The
rest of your fees, O gods--the senators of Athens,
together with the common lag of people--what is
amiss in them, you gods, make suitable for
destruction. For these my present friends, as they
are to me nothing, so in nothing bless them, and to
nothing are they welcome.
Uncover, dogs, and lap.
The dishes are uncovered and seen to be full of warm water
What does his lordship mean?
I know not.
May you a better feast never behold,
You knot of mouth-friends I smoke and lukewarm water
Is your perfection. This is Timons last;
Who, stuck and spangled with your flatteries,
Washes it off, and sprinkles in your faces
Your reeking villany.
Throwing the water in their faces
Live loathed and long,
Most smiling, smooth, detested parasites,
Courteous destroyers, affable wolves, meek bears,
You fools of fortune, trencher-friends, times flies,
Cap and knee slaves, vapours, and minute-jacks!
Of man and beast the infinite malady
Crust you quite oer! What, dost thou go?
Soft! take thy physic first--thou too--and thou;--
Stay, I will lend thee money, borrow none.
Throws the dishes at them, and drives them out
What, all in motion? Henceforth be no feast,
Whereat a villains not a welcome guest.
Burn, house! sink, Athens! henceforth hated be
Of Timon man and all humanity!
Exit
Re-enter the Lords, Senators,  and c
How now, my lords!
Know you the quality of Lord Timons fury?
Push! did you see my cap?
I have lost my gown.
Hes but a mad lord, and nought but humour sways him.
He gave me a jewel th other day, and now he has
beat it out of my hat: did you see my jewel?
Did you see my cap?
Here tis.
Here lies my gown.
Lets make no stay.
Lord Timons mad.
I feel t upon my bones.
One day he gives us diamonds, next day stones.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Without the walls of Athens.
Enter TIMON
Let me look back upon thee. O thou wall,
That girdlest in those wolves, dive in the earth,
And fence not Athens! Matrons, turn incontinent!
Obedience fail in children! slaves and fools,
Pluck the grave wrinkled senate from the bench,
And minister in their steads! to general filths
Convert o the instant, green virginity,
Do t in your parents eyes! bankrupts, hold fast;
Rather than render back, out with your knives,
And cut your trusters throats! bound servants, steal!
Large-handed robbers your grave masters are,
And pill by law. Maid, to thy masters bed;
Thy mistress is o the brothel! Son of sixteen,
pluck the lined crutch from thy old limping sire,
With it beat out his brains! Piety, and fear,
Religion to the gods, peace, justice, truth,
Domestic awe, night-rest, and neighbourhood,
Instruction, manners, mysteries, and trades,
Degrees, observances, customs, and laws,
Decline to your confounding contraries,
And let confusion live! Plagues, incident to men,
Your potent and infectious fevers heap
On Athens, ripe for stroke! Thou cold sciatica,
Cripple our senators, that their limbs may halt
As lamely as their manners. Lust and liberty
Creep in the minds and marrows of our youth,
That gainst the stream of virtue they may strive,
And drown themselves in riot! Itches, blains,
Sow all the Athenian bosoms; and their crop
Be general leprosy! Breath infect breath,
at their society, as their friendship, may
merely poison! Nothing Ill bear from thee,
But nakedness, thou detestable town!
Take thou that too, with multiplying bans!
Timon will to the woods; where he shall find
The unkindest beast more kinder than mankind.
The gods confound--hear me, you good gods all--
The Athenians both within and out that wall!
And grant, as Timon grows, his hate may grow
To the whole race of mankind, high and low! Amen.
Exit
SCENE II. Athens. A room in Timons house.
Enter FLAVIUS, with two or three Servants
Hear you, master steward, wheres our master?
Are we undone? cast off? nothing remaining?
Alack, my fellows, what should I say to you?
Let me be recorded by the righteous gods,
I am as poor as you.
Such a house broke!
So noble a master falln! All gone! and not
One friend to take his fortune by the arm,
And go along with him!
As we do turn our backs
From our companion thrown into his grave,
So his familiars to his buried fortunes
Slink all away, leave their false vows with him,
Like empty purses pickd; and his poor self,
A dedicated beggar to the air,
With his disease of all-shunnd poverty,
Walks, like contempt, alone. More of our fellows.
Enter other Servants
All broken implements of a ruind house.
Yet do our hearts wear Timons livery;
That see I by our faces; we are fellows still,
Serving alike in sorrow: leakd is our bark,
And we, poor mates, stand on the dying deck,
Hearing the surges threat: we must all part
Into this sea of air.
Good fellows all,
The latest of my wealth Ill share amongst you.
Wherever we shall meet, for Timons sake,
Lets yet be fellows; lets shake our heads, and say,
As twere a knell unto our masters fortunes,
We have seen better days. Let each take some;
Nay, put out all your hands. Not one word more:
Thus part we rich in sorrow, parting poor.
Servants embrace, and part several ways
O, the fierce wretchedness that glory brings us!
Who would not wish to be from wealth exempt,
Since riches point to misery and contempt?
Who would be so mockd with glory? or to live
But in a dream of friendship?
To have his pomp and all what state compounds
But only painted, like his varnishd friends?
Poor honest lord, brought low by his own heart,
Undone by goodness! Strange, unusual blood,
When mans worst sin is, he does too much good!
Who, then, dares to be half so kind again?
For bounty, that makes gods, does still mar men.
My dearest lord, blessd, to be most accursed,
Rich, only to be wretched, thy great fortunes
Are made thy chief afflictions. Alas, kind lord!
Hes flung in rage from this ingrateful seat
Of monstrous friends, nor has he with him to
Supply his life, or that which can command it.
Ill follow and inquire him out:
Ill ever serve his mind with my best will;
Whilst I have gold, Ill be his steward still.
Exit
SCENE III. Woods and cave, near the seashore.
Enter TIMON, from the cave
O blessed breeding sun, draw from the earth
Rotten humidity; below thy sisters orb
Infect the air! Twinnd brothers of one womb,
Whose procreation, residence, and birth,
Scarce is dividant, touch them with several fortunes;
The greater scorns the lesser: not nature,
To whom all sores lay siege, can bear great fortune,
But by contempt of nature.
Raise me this beggar, and deny t that lord;
The senator shall bear contempt hereditary,
The beggar native honour.
It is the pasture lards the rothers sides,
The want that makes him lean. Who dares, who dares,
In purity of manhood stand upright,
And say This mans a flatterer? if one be,
So are they all; for every grise of fortune
Is smoothd by that below: the learned pate
Ducks to the golden fool: all is oblique;
Theres nothing level in our cursed natures,
But direct villany. Therefore, be abhorrd
All feasts, societies, and throngs of men!
His semblable, yea, himself, Timon disdains:
Destruction fang mankind! Earth, yield me roots!
Digging
Who seeks for better of thee, sauce his palate
With thy most operant poison! What is here?
Gold? yellow, glittering, precious gold? No, gods,
I am no idle votarist: roots, you clear heavens!
Thus much of this will make black white, foul fair,
Wrong right, base noble, old young, coward valiant.
Ha, you gods! why this? what this, you gods? Why, this
Will lug your priests and servants from your sides,
Pluck stout mens pillows from below their heads:
This yellow slave
Will knit and break religions, bless the accursed,
Make the hoar leprosy adored, place thieves
And give them title, knee and approbation
With senators on the bench: this is it
That makes the wappend widow wed again;
She, whom the spital-house and ulcerous sores
Would cast the gorge at, this embalms and spices
To the April day again. Come, damned earth,
Thou common whore of mankind, that putst odds
Among the route of nations, I will make thee
Do thy right nature.
March afar off
Ha! a drum ? Thourt quick,
But yet Ill bury thee: thoult go, strong thief,
When gouty keepers of thee cannot stand.
Nay, stay thou out for earnest.
Keeping some gold
Enter ALCIBIADES, with drum and fife, in warlike manner; PHRYNIA and TIMANDRA
What art thou there? speak.
A beast, as thou art. The canker gnaw thy heart,
For showing me again the eyes of man!
What is thy name? Is man so hateful to thee,
That art thyself a man?
I am Misanthropos, and hate mankind.
For thy part, I do wish thou wert a dog,
That I might love thee something.
I know thee well;
But in thy fortunes am unlearnd and strange.
I know thee too; and more than that I know thee,
I not desire to know. Follow thy drum;
With mans blood paint the ground, gules, gules:
Religious canons, civil laws are cruel;
Then what should war be? This fell whore of thine
Hath in her more destruction than thy sword,
For all her cherubim look.
Thy lips rot off!
I will not kiss thee; then the rot returns
To thine own lips again.
How came the noble Timon to this change?
As the moon does, by wanting light to give:
But then renew I could not, like the moon;
There were no suns to borrow of.
Noble Timon,
What friendship may I do thee?
None, but to
Maintain my opinion.
What is it, Timon?
Promise me friendship, but perform none: if thou
wilt not promise, the gods plague thee, for thou art
a man! if thou dost perform, confound thee, for
thou art a man!
I have heard in some sort of thy miseries.
Thou sawst them, when I had prosperity.
I see them now; then was a blessed time.
As thine is now, held with a brace of harlots.
Is this the Athenian minion, whom the world
Voiced so regardfully?
Art thou Timandra?
Yes.
Be a whore still: they love thee not that use thee;
Give them diseases, leaving with thee their lust.
Make use of thy salt hours: season the slaves
For tubs and baths; bring down rose-cheeked youth
To the tub-fast and the diet.
Hang thee, monster!
Pardon him, sweet Timandra; for his wits
Are drownd and lost in his calamities.
I have but little gold of late, brave Timon,
The want whereof doth daily make revolt
In my penurious band: I have heard, and grieved,
How cursed Athens, mindless of thy worth,
Forgetting thy great deeds, when neighbour states,
But for thy sword and fortune, trod upon them,--
I prithee, beat thy drum, and get thee gone.
I am thy friend, and pity thee, dear Timon.
How dost thou pity him whom thou dost trouble?
I had rather be alone.
Why, fare thee well:
Here is some gold for thee.
Keep it, I cannot eat it.
When I have laid proud Athens on a heap,--
Warrst thou gainst Athens?
Ay, Timon, and have cause.
The gods confound them all in thy conquest;
And thee after, when thou hast conquerd!
Why me, Timon?
That, by killing of villains,
Thou wast born to conquer my country.
Put up thy gold: go on,--heres gold,--go on;
Be as a planetary plague, when Jove
Will oer some high-viced city hang his poison
In the sick air: let not thy sword skip one:
Pity not honourd age for his white beard;
He is an usurer: strike me the counterfeit matron;
It is her habit only that is honest,
Herselfs a bawd: let not the virgins cheek
Make soft thy trenchant sword; for those milk-paps,
That through the window-bars bore at mens eyes,
Are not within the leaf of pity writ,
But set them down horrible traitors: spare not the babe,
Whose dimpled smiles from fools exhaust their mercy;
Think it a bastard, whom the oracle
Hath doubtfully pronounced thy throat shall cut,
And mince it sans remorse: swear against objects;
Put armour on thine ears and on thine eyes;
Whose proof, nor yells of mothers, maids, nor babes,
Nor sight of priests in holy vestments bleeding,
Shall pierce a jot. Theres gold to pay soldiers:
Make large confusion; and, thy fury spent,
Confounded be thyself! Speak not, be gone.
Hast thou gold yet? Ill take the gold thou
givest me,
Not all thy counsel.
Dost thou, or dost thou not, heavens curse
upon thee!
Give us some gold, good Timon: hast thou more?
Enough to make a whore forswear her trade,
And to make whores, a bawd. Hold up, you sluts,
Your aprons mountant: you are not oathable,
Although, I know, you ll swear, terribly swear
Into strong shudders and to heavenly agues
The immortal gods that hear you,--spare your oaths,
Ill trust to your conditions: be whores still;
And he whose pious breath seeks to convert you,
Be strong in whore, allure him, burn him up;
Let your close fire predominate his smoke,
And be no turncoats: yet may your pains, six months,
Be quite contrary: and thatch your poor thin roofs
With burthens of the dead;--some that were hangd,
No matter:--wear them, betray with them: whore still;
Paint till a horse may mire upon your face,
A pox of wrinkles!
Well, more gold: what then?
Believet, that well do any thing for gold.
Consumptions sow
In hollow bones of man; strike their sharp shins,
And mar mens spurring. Crack the lawyers voice,
That he may never more false title plead,
Nor sound his quillets shrilly: hoar the flamen,
That scolds against the quality of flesh,
And not believes himself: down with the nose,
Down with it flat; take the bridge quite away
Of him that, his particular to foresee,
Smells from the general weal: make curld-pate
ruffians bald;
And let the unscarrd braggarts of the war
Derive some pain from you: plague all;
That your activity may defeat and quell
The source of all erection. Theres more gold:
Do you damn others, and let this damn you,
And ditches grave you all!
More counsel with more money, bounteous Timon.
More whore, more mischief first; I have given you earnest.
Strike up the drum towards Athens! Farewell, Timon:
If I thrive well, Ill visit thee again.
If I hope well, Ill never see thee more.
I never did thee harm.
Yes, thou spokest well of me.
Callst thou that harm?
Men daily find it. Get thee away, and take
Thy beagles with thee.
We but offend him. Strike!
Drum beats. Exeunt ALCIBIADES, PHRYNIA, and TIMANDRA
That nature, being sick of mans unkindness,
Should yet be hungry! Common mother, thou,
Digging
Whose womb unmeasurable, and infinite breast,
Teems, and feeds all; whose self-same mettle,
Whereof thy proud child, arrogant man, is puffd,
Engenders the black toad and adder blue,
The gilded newt and eyeless venomd worm,
With all the abhorred births below crisp heaven
Whereon Hyperions quickening fire doth shine;
Yield him, who all thy human sons doth hate,
From forth thy plenteous bosom, one poor root!
Ensear thy fertile and conceptious womb,
Let it no more bring out ingrateful man!
Go great with tigers, dragons, wolves, and bears;
Teem with new monsters, whom thy upward face
Hath to the marbled mansion all above
Never presented!--O, a root,--dear thanks!--
Dry up thy marrows, vines, and plough-torn leas;
Whereof ungrateful man, with liquorish draughts
And morsels unctuous, greases his pure mind,
That from it all consideration slips!
Enter APEMANTUS
More man? plague, plague!
I was directed hither: men report
Thou dost affect my manners, and dost use them.
Tis, then, because thou dost not keep a dog,
Whom I would imitate: consumption catch thee!
This is in thee a nature but infected;
A poor unmanly melancholy sprung
From change of fortune. Why this spade? this place?
This slave-like habit? and these looks of care?
Thy flatterers yet wear silk, drink wine, lie soft;
Hug their diseased perfumes, and have forgot
That ever Timon was. Shame not these woods,
By putting on the cunning of a carper.
Be thou a flatterer now, and seek to thrive
By that which has undone thee: hinge thy knee,
And let his very breath, whom thoult observe,
Blow off thy cap; praise his most vicious strain,
And call it excellent: thou wast told thus;
Thou gavest thine ears like tapsters that bid welcome
To knaves and all approachers: tis most just
That thou turn rascal; hadst thou wealth again,
Rascals should have t. Do not assume my likeness.
Were I like thee, Ild throw away myself.
Thou hast cast away thyself, being like thyself;
A madman so long, now a fool. What, thinkst
That the bleak air, thy boisterous chamberlain,
Will put thy shirt on warm? will these mossd trees,
That have outlived the eagle, page thy heels,
And skip where thou pointst out? will the
cold brook,
Candied with ice, caudle thy morning taste,
To cure thy oer-nights surfeit? Call the creatures
Whose naked natures live in an the spite
Of wreakful heaven, whose bare unhoused trunks,
To the conflicting elements exposed,
Answer mere nature; bid them flatter thee;
O, thou shalt find--
A fool of thee: depart.
I love thee better now than eer I did.
I hate thee worse.
Why?
Thou flatterst misery.
I flatter not; but say thou art a caitiff.
Why dost thou seek me out?
To vex thee.
Always a villains office or a fools.
Dost please thyself int?
Ay.
What! a knave too?
If thou didst put this sour-cold habit on
To castigate thy pride, twere well: but thou
Dost it enforcedly; thouldst courtier be again,
Wert thou not beggar. Willing misery
Outlives encertain pomp, is crownd before:
The one is filling still, never complete;
The other, at high wish: best state, contentless,
Hath a distracted and most wretched being,
Worse than the worst, content.
Thou shouldst desire to die, being miserable.
Not by his breath that is more miserable.
Thou art a slave, whom Fortunes tender arm
With favour never claspd; but bred a dog.
Hadst thou, like us from our first swath, proceeded
The sweet degrees that this brief world affords
To such as may the passive drugs of it
Freely command, thou wouldst have plunged thyself
In general riot; melted down thy youth
In different beds of lust; and never learnd
The icy precepts of respect, but followd
The sugard game before thee. But myself,
Who had the world as my confectionary,
The mouths, the tongues, the eyes and hearts of men
At duty, more than I could frame employment,
That numberless upon me stuck as leaves
Do on the oak, hive with one winters brush
Fell from their boughs and left me open, bare
For every storm that blows: I, to bear this,
That never knew but better, is some burden:
Thy nature did commence in sufferance, time
Hath made thee hard int. Why shouldst thou hate men?
They never flatterd thee: what hast thou given?
If thou wilt curse, thy father, that poor rag,
Must be thy subject, who in spite put stuff
To some she beggar and compounded thee
Poor rogue hereditary. Hence, be gone!
If thou hadst not been born the worst of men,
Thou hadst been a knave and flatterer.
Art thou proud yet?
Ay, that I am not thee.
I, that I was
No prodigal.
I, that I am one now:
Were all the wealth I have shut up in thee,
Ild give thee leave to hang it. Get thee gone.
That the whole life of Athens were in this!
Thus would I eat it.
Eating a root
Here; I will mend thy feast.
Offering him a root
First mend my company, take away thyself.
So I shall mend mine own, by the lack of thine.
Tis not well mended so, it is but botchd;
if not, I would it were.
What wouldst thou have to Athens?
Thee thither in a whirlwind. If thou wilt,
Tell them there I have gold; look, so I have.
Here is no use for gold.
The best and truest;
For here it sleeps, and does no hired harm.
Where liest o nights, Timon?
Under thats above me.
Where feedst thou o days, Apemantus?
Where my stomach finds meat; or, rather, where I eat
it.
Would poison were obedient and knew my mind!
Where wouldst thou send it?
To sauce thy dishes.
The middle of humanity thou never knewest, but the
extremity of both ends: when thou wast in thy gilt
and thy perfume, they mocked thee for too much
curiosity; in thy rags thou knowest none, but art
despised for the contrary. Theres a medlar for
thee, eat it.
On what I hate I feed not.
Dost hate a medlar?
Ay, though it look like thee.
An thou hadst hated meddlers sooner, thou shouldst
have loved thyself better now. What man didst thou
ever know unthrift that was beloved after his means?
Who, without those means thou talkest of, didst thou
ever know beloved?
Myself.
I understand thee; thou hadst some means to keep a
dog.
What things in the world canst thou nearest compare
to thy flatterers?
Women nearest; but men, men are the things
themselves. What wouldst thou do with the world,
Apemantus, if it lay in thy power?
Give it the beasts, to be rid of the men.
Wouldst thou have thyself fall in the confusion of
men, and remain a beast with the beasts?
Ay, Timon.
A beastly ambition, which the gods grant thee t
attain to! If thou wert the lion, the fox would
beguile thee; if thou wert the lamb, the fox would
eat three: if thou wert the fox, the lion would
suspect thee, when peradventure thou wert accused by
the ass: if thou wert the ass, thy dulness would
torment thee, and still thou livedst but as a
breakfast to the wolf: if thou wert the wolf, thy
greediness would afflict thee, and oft thou shouldst
hazard thy life for thy dinner: wert thou the
unicorn, pride and wrath would confound thee and
make thine own self the conquest of thy fury: wert
thou a bear, thou wouldst be killed by the horse:
wert thou a horse, thou wouldst be seized by the
leopard: wert thou a leopard, thou wert german to
the lion and the spots of thy kindred were jurors on
thy life: all thy safety were remotion and thy
defence absence. What beast couldst thou be, that
were not subject to a beast? and what a beast art
thou already, that seest not thy loss in
transformation!
If thou couldst please me with speaking to me, thou
mightst have hit upon it here: the commonwealth of
Athens is become a forest of beasts.
How has the ass broke the wall, that thou art out of the city?
Yonder comes a poet and a painter: the plague of
company light upon thee! I will fear to catch it
and give way: when I know not what else to do, Ill
see thee again.
When there is nothing living but thee, thou shalt be
welcome. I had rather be a beggars dog than Apemantus.
Thou art the cap of all the fools alive.
Would thou wert clean enough to spit upon!
A plague on thee! thou art too bad to curse.
All villains that do stand by thee are pure.
There is no leprosy but what thou speakst.
If I name thee.
Ill beat thee, but I should infect my hands.
I would my tongue could rot them off!
Away, thou issue of a mangy dog!
Choler does kill me that thou art alive;
I swound to see thee.
Would thou wouldst burst!
Away,
Thou tedious rogue! I am sorry I shall lose
A stone by thee.
Throws a stone at him
Beast!
Slave!
Toad!
Rogue, rogue, rogue!
I am sick of this false world, and will love nought
But even the mere necessities upon t.
Then, Timon, presently prepare thy grave;
Lie where the light foam the sea may beat
Thy grave-stone daily: make thine epitaph,
That death in me at others lives may laugh.
To the gold
O thou sweet king-killer, and dear divorce
Twixt natural son and sire! thou bright defiler
Of Hymens purest bed! thou valiant Mars!
Thou ever young, fresh, loved and delicate wooer,
Whose blush doth thaw the consecrated snow
That lies on Dians lap! thou visible god,
That solderst close impossibilities,
And makest them kiss! that speakst with
every tongue,
To every purpose! O thou touch of hearts!
Think, thy slave man rebels, and by thy virtue
Set them into confounding odds, that beasts
May have the world in empire!
Would twere so!
But not till I am dead. Ill say thoust gold:
Thou wilt be throngd to shortly.
Throngd to!
Ay.
Thy back, I prithee.
Live, and love thy misery.
Long live so, and so die.
Exit APEMANTUS
I am quit.
Moe things like men! Eat, Timon, and abhor them.
Enter Banditti
Where should he have this gold? It is some poor
fragment, some slender sort of his remainder: the
mere want of gold, and the falling-from of his
friends, drove him into this melancholy.
It is noised he hath a mass of treasure.
Let us make the assay upon him: if he care not
fort, he will supply us easily; if he covetously
reserve it, how shalls get it?
True; for he bears it not about him, tis hid.
Is not this he?
Where?
Tis his description.
He; I know him.
Save thee, Timon.
Now, thieves?
Soldiers, not thieves.
Both too; and womens sons.
We are not thieves, but men that much do want.
Your greatest want is, you want much of meat.
Why should you want? Behold, the earth hath roots;
Within this mile break forth a hundred springs;
The oaks bear mast, the briers scarlet hips;
The bounteous housewife, nature, on each bush
Lays her full mess before you. Want! why want?
We cannot live on grass, on berries, water,
As beasts and birds and fishes.
Nor on the beasts themselves, the birds, and fishes;
You must eat men. Yet thanks I must you con
That you are thieves professd, that you work not
In holier shapes: for there is boundless theft
In limited professions. Rascal thieves,
Heres gold. Go, suck the subtle blood o the grape,
Till the high fever seethe your blood to froth,
And so scape hanging: trust not the physician;
His antidotes are poison, and he slays
Moe than you rob: take wealth and lives together;
Do villany, do, since you protest to dot,
Like workmen. Ill example you with thievery.
The suns a thief, and with his great attraction
Robs the vast sea: the moons an arrant thief,
And her pale fire she snatches from the sun:
The seas a thief, whose liquid surge resolves
The moon into salt tears: the earths a thief,
That feeds and breeds by a composture stolen
From general excrement: each things a thief:
The laws, your curb and whip, in their rough power
Have unchequed theft. Love not yourselves: away,
Rob one another. Theres more gold. Cut throats:
All that you meet are thieves: to Athens go,
Break open shops; nothing can you steal,
But thieves do lose it: steal no less for this
I give you; and gold confound you howsoeer! Amen.
Has almost charmed me from my profession, by
persuading me to it.
Tis in the malice of mankind that he thus advises
us; not to have us thrive in our mystery.
Ill believe him as an enemy, and give over my trade.
Let us first see peace in Athens: there is no time
so miserable but a man may be true.
Exeunt Banditti
Enter FLAVIUS
O you gods!
Is yond despised and ruinous man my lord?
Full of decay and failing? O monument
And wonder of good deeds evilly bestowd!
What an alteration of honour
Has desperate want made!
What viler thing upon the earth than friends
Who can bring noblest minds to basest ends!
How rarely does it meet with this times guise,
When man was wishd to love his enemies!
Grant I may ever love, and rather woo
Those that would mischief me than those that do!
Has caught me in his eye: I will present
My honest grief unto him; and, as my lord,
Still serve him with my life. My dearest master!
Away! what art thou?
Have you forgot me, sir?
Why dost ask that? I have forgot all men;
Then, if thou grantst thourt a man, I have forgot thee.
An honest poor servant of yours.
Then I know thee not:
I never had honest man about me, I; all
I kept were knaves, to serve in meat to villains.
The gods are witness,
Neer did poor steward wear a truer grief
For his undone lord than mine eyes for you.
What, dost thou weep? Come nearer. Then I
love thee,
