Because thou art a woman, and disclaimst
Flinty mankind; whose eyes do never give
But thorough lust and laughter. Pitys sleeping:
Strange times, that weep with laughing, not with weeping!
I beg of you to know me, good my lord,
To accept my grief and whilst this poor wealth lasts
To entertain me as your steward still.
Had I a steward
So true, so just, and now so comfortable?
It almost turns my dangerous nature mild.
Let me behold thy face. Surely, this man
Was born of woman.
Forgive my general and exceptless rashness,
You perpetual-sober gods! I do proclaim
One honest man--mistake me not--but one;
No more, I pray,--and hes a steward.
How fain would I have hated all mankind!
And thou redeemst thyself: but all, save thee,
I fell with curses.
Methinks thou art more honest now than wise;
For, by oppressing and betraying me,
Thou mightst have sooner got another service:
For many so arrive at second masters,
Upon their first lords neck. But tell me true--
For I must ever doubt, though neer so sure--
Is not thy kindness subtle, covetous,
If not a usuring kindness, and, as rich men deal gifts,
Expecting in return twenty for one?
No, my most worthy master; in whose breast
Doubt and suspect, alas, are placed too late:
You should have feard false times when you did feast:
Suspect still comes where an estate is least.
That which I show, heaven knows, is merely love,
Duty and zeal to your unmatched mind,
Care of your food and living; and, believe it,
My most honourd lord,
For any benefit that points to me,
Either in hope or present, Ild exchange
For this one wish, that you had power and wealth
To requite me, by making rich yourself.
Look thee, tis so! Thou singly honest man,
Here, take: the gods out of my misery
Have sent thee treasure. Go, live rich and happy;
But thus conditiond: thou shalt build from men;
Hate all, curse all, show charity to none,
But let the famishd flesh slide from the bone,
Ere thou relieve the beggar; give to dogs
What thou denyst to men; let prisons swallow em,
Debts wither em to nothing; be men like
blasted woods,
And may diseases lick up their false bloods!
And so farewell and thrive.
O, let me stay,
And comfort you, my master.
If thou hatest curses,
Stay not; fly, whilst thou art blest and free:
Neer see thou man, and let me neer see thee.
Exit FLAVIUS. TIMON retires to his cave
ACT V
SCENE I. The woods. Before Timons cave.
Enter Poet and Painter; TIMON watching them from his cave
As I took note of the place, it cannot be far where
he abides.
Whats to be thought of him? does the rumour hold
for true, that hes so full of gold?
Certain: Alcibiades reports it; Phrynia and
Timandra had gold of him: he likewise enriched poor
straggling soldiers with great quantity: tis said
he gave unto his steward a mighty sum.
Then this breaking of his has been but a try for his friends.
Nothing else: you shall see him a palm in Athens
again, and flourish with the highest. Therefore
tis not amiss we tender our loves to him, in this
supposed distress of his: it will show honestly in
us; and is very likely to load our purposes with
what they travail for, if it be a just true report
that goes of his having.
What have you now to present unto him?
Nothing at this time but my visitation: only I will
promise him an excellent piece.
I must serve him so too, tell him of an intent
thats coming toward him.
Good as the best. Promising is the very air o the
time: it opens the eyes of expectation:
performance is ever the duller for his act; and,
but in the plainer and simpler kind of people, the
deed of saying is quite out of use. To promise is
most courtly and fashionable: performance is a kind
of will or testament which argues a great sickness
in his judgment that makes it.
TIMON comes from his cave, behind
[Aside]  Excellent workman! thou canst not paint a
man so bad as is thyself.
I am thinking what I shall say I have provided for
him: it must be a personating of himself; a satire
against the softness of prosperity, with a discovery
of the infinite flatteries that follow youth and opulency.
[Aside]  Must thou needs stand for a villain in
thine own work? wilt thou whip thine own faults in
other men? Do so, I have gold for thee.
Nay, lets seek him:
Then do we sin against our own estate,
When we may profit meet, and come too late.
True;
When the day serves, before black-cornerd night,
Find what thou wantst by free and offerd light. Come.
[Aside]  Ill meet you at the turn. What a
gods gold,
That he is worshippd in a baser temple
Than where swine feed!
Tis thou that riggst the bark and ploughst the foam,
Settlest admired reverence in a slave:
To thee be worship! and thy saints for aye
Be crownd with plagues that thee alone obey!
Fit I meet them.
Coming forward
Hail, worthy Timon!
Our late noble master!
Have I once lived to see two honest men?
Sir,
Having often of your open bounty tasted,
Hearing you were retired, your friends falln off,
Whose thankless natures--O abhorred spirits!--
Not all the whips of heaven are large enough:
What! to you,
Whose star-like nobleness gave life and influence
To their whole being! I am rapt and cannot cover
The monstrous bulk of this ingratitude
With any size of words.
Let it go naked, men may seet the better:
You that are honest, by being what you are,
Make them best seen and known.
He and myself
Have travaild in the great shower of your gifts,
And sweetly felt it.
Ay, you are honest men.
We are hither come to offer you our service.
Most honest men! Why, how shall I requite you?
Can you eat roots, and drink cold water? no.
What we can do, well do, to do you service.
Yere honest men: yeve heard that I have gold;
I am sure you have: speak truth; yere honest men.
So it is said, my noble lord; but therefore
Came not my friend nor I.
Good honest men! Thou drawst a counterfeit
Best in all Athens: thourt, indeed, the best;
Thou counterfeitst most lively.
So, so, my lord.
Een so, sir, as I say. And, for thy fiction,
Why, thy verse swells with stuff so fine and smooth
That thou art even natural in thine art.
But, for all this, my honest-natured friends,
I must needs say you have a little fault:
Marry, tis not monstrous in you, neither wish I
You take much pains to mend.
Beseech your honour
To make it known to us.
Youll take it ill.
Most thankfully, my lord.
Will you, indeed?
Doubt it not, worthy lord.
Theres never a one of you but trusts a knave,
That mightily deceives you.
Do we, my lord?
Ay, and you hear him cog, see him dissemble,
Know his gross patchery, love him, feed him,
Keep in your bosom: yet remain assured
That hes a made-up villain.
I know none such, my lord.
Nor I.
Look you, I love you well; Ill give you gold,
Rid me these villains from your companies:
Hang them or stab them, drown them in a draught,
Confound them by some course, and come to me,
Ill give you gold enough.
Name them, my lord, lets know them.
You that way and you this, but two in company;
Each man apart, all single and alone,
Yet an arch-villain keeps him company.
If where thou art two villains shall not be,
Come not near him. If thou wouldst not reside
But where one villain is, then him abandon.
Hence, pack! theres gold; you came for gold, ye slaves:
To Painter
You have workd for me; theres payment for you: hence!
To Poet
You are an alchemist; make gold of that.
Out, rascal dogs!
Beats them out, and then retires to his cave
Enter FLAVIUS and two Senators
It is in vain that you would speak with Timon;
For he is set so only to himself
That nothing but himself which looks like man
Is friendly with him.
Bring us to his cave:
It is our part and promise to the Athenians
To speak with Timon.
At all times alike
Men are not still the same: twas time and griefs
That framed him thus: time, with his fairer hand,
Offering the fortunes of his former days,
The former man may make him. Bring us to him,
And chance it as it may.
Here is his cave.
Peace and content be here! Lord Timon! Timon!
Look out, and speak to friends: the Athenians,
By two of their most reverend senate, greet thee:
Speak to them, noble Timon.
TIMON comes from his cave
Thou sun, that comfortst, burn! Speak, and
be hangd:
For each true word, a blister! and each false
Be as cauterizing to the root o the tongue,
Consuming it with speaking!
Worthy Timon,--
Of none but such as you, and you of Timon.
The senators of Athens greet thee, Timon.
I thank them; and would send them back the plague,
Could I but catch it for them.
O, forget
What we are sorry for ourselves in thee.
The senators with one consent of love
Entreat thee back to Athens; who have thought
On special dignities, which vacant lie
For thy best use and wearing.
They confess
Toward thee forgetfulness too general, gross:
Which now the public body, which doth seldom
Play the recanter, feeling in itself
A lack of Timons aid, hath sense withal
Of its own fail, restraining aid to Timon;
And send forth us, to make their sorrowd render,
Together with a recompense more fruitful
Than their offence can weigh down by the dram;
Ay, even such heaps and sums of love and wealth
As shall to thee blot out what wrongs were theirs
And write in thee the figures of their love,
Ever to read them thine.
You witch me in it;
Surprise me to the very brink of tears:
Lend me a fools heart and a womans eyes,
And Ill beweep these comforts, worthy senators.
Therefore, so please thee to return with us
And of our Athens, thine and ours, to take
The captainship, thou shalt be met with thanks,
Allowd with absolute power and thy good name
Live with authority: so soon we shall drive back
Of Alcibiades the approaches wild,
Who, like a boar too savage, doth root up
His countrys peace.
And shakes his threatening sword
Against the walls of Athens.
Therefore, Timon,--
Well, sir, I will; therefore, I will, sir; thus:
If Alcibiades kill my countrymen,
Let Alcibiades know this of Timon,
That Timon cares not. But if be sack fair Athens,
And take our goodly aged men by the beards,
Giving our holy virgins to the stain
Of contumelious, beastly, mad-braind war,
Then let him know, and tell him Timon speaks it,
In pity of our aged and our youth,
I cannot choose but tell him, that I care not,
And let him taket at worst; for their knives care not,
While you have throats to answer: for myself,
Theres not a whittle in the unruly camp
But I do prize it at my love before
The reverendst throat in Athens. So I leave you
To the protection of the prosperous gods,
As thieves to keepers.
Stay not, alls in vain.
Why, I was writing of my epitaph;
it will be seen to-morrow: my long sickness
Of health and living now begins to mend,
And nothing brings me all things. Go, live still;
Be Alcibiades your plague, you his,
And last so long enough!
We speak in vain.
But yet I love my country, and am not
One that rejoices in the common wreck,
As common bruit doth put it.
Thats well spoke.
Commend me to my loving countrymen,--
These words become your lips as they pass
thorough them.
And enter in our ears like great triumphers
In their applauding gates.
Commend me to them,
And tell them that, to ease them of their griefs,
Their fears of hostile strokes, their aches, losses,
Their pangs of love, with other incident throes
That natures fragile vessel doth sustain
In lifes uncertain voyage, I will some kindness do them:
Ill teach them to prevent wild Alcibiades wrath.
I like this well; he will return again.
I have a tree, which grows here in my close,
That mine own use invites me to cut down,
And shortly must I fell it: tell my friends,
Tell Athens, in the sequence of degree
From high to low throughout, that whoso please
To stop affliction, let him take his haste,
Come hither, ere my tree hath felt the axe,
And hang himself. I pray you, do my greeting.
Trouble him no further; thus you still shall find him.
Come not to me again: but say to Athens,
Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
Upon the beached verge of the salt flood;
Who once a day with his embossed froth
The turbulent surge shall cover: thither come,
And let my grave-stone be your oracle.
Lips, let sour words go by and language end:
What is amiss plague and infection mend!
Graves only be mens works and death their gain!
Sun, hide thy beams! Timon hath done his reign.
Retires to his cave
His discontents are unremoveably
Coupled to nature.
Our hope in him is dead: let us return,
And strain what other means is left unto us
In our dear peril.
It requires swift foot.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Before the walls of Athens.
Enter two Senators and a Messenger
Thou hast painfully discoverd: are his files
As full as thy report?
have spoke the least:
Besides, his expedition promises
Present approach.
We stand much hazard, if they bring not Timon.
I met a courier, one mine ancient friend;
Whom, though in general part we were opposed,
Yet our old love made a particular force,
And made us speak like friends: this man was riding
From Alcibiades to Timons cave,
With letters of entreaty, which imported
His fellowship i the cause against your city,
In part for his sake moved.
Here come our brothers.
Enter the Senators from TIMON
No talk of Timon, nothing of him expect.
The enemies drum is heard, and fearful scouring
Doth choke the air with dust: in, and prepare:
Ours is the fall, I fear; our foes the snare.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The woods. Timons cave, and a rude tomb seen.
Enter a Soldier, seeking TIMON
By all description this should be the place.
Whos here? speak, ho! No answer! What is this?
Timon is dead, who hath outstretchd his span:
Some beast reard this; there does not live a man.
Dead, sure; and this his grave. Whats on this tomb
I cannot read; the character Ill take with wax:
Our captain hath in every figure skill,
An aged interpreter, though young in days:
Before proud Athens hes set down by this,
Whose fall the mark of his ambition is.
Exit
SCENE IV. Before the walls of Athens.
Trumpets sound. Enter ALCIBIADES with his powers
Sound to this coward and lascivious town
Our terrible approach.
A parley sounded
Enter Senators on the walls
Till now you have gone on and filld the time
With all licentious measure, making your wills
The scope of justice; till now myself and such
As slept within the shadow of your power
Hav e wanderd with our traversed arms and breathed
Our sufferance vainly: now the time is flush,
When crouching marrow in the bearer strong
Cries of itself No more: now breathless wrong
Shall sit and pant in your great chairs of ease,
And pursy insolence shall break his wind
With fear and horrid flight.
Noble and young,
When thy first griefs were but a mere conceit,
Ere thou hadst power or we had cause of fear,
We sent to thee, to give thy rages balm,
To wipe out our ingratitude with loves
Above their quantity.
So did we woo
Transformed Timon to our citys love
By humble message and by promised means:
We were not all unkind, nor all deserve
The common stroke of war.
These walls of ours
Were not erected by their hands from whom
You have received your griefs; nor are they such
That these great towers, trophies and schools
should fall
For private faults in them.
Nor are they living
Who were the motives that you first went out;
Shame that they wanted cunning, in excess
Hath broke their hearts. March, noble lord,
Into our city with thy banners spread:
By decimation, and a tithed death--
If thy revenges hunger for that food
Which nature loathes--take thou the destined tenth,
And by the hazard of the spotted die
Let die the spotted.
All have not offended;
For those that were, it is not square to take
On those that are, revenges: crimes, like lands,
Are not inherited. Then, dear countryman,
Bring in thy ranks, but leave without thy rage:
Spare thy Athenian cradle and those kin
Which in the bluster of thy wrath must fall
With those that have offended: like a shepherd,
Approach the fold and cull the infected forth,
But kill not all together.
What thou wilt,
Thou rather shalt enforce it with thy smile
Than hew tot with thy sword.
Set but thy foot
Against our rampired gates, and they shall ope;
So thou wilt send thy gentle heart before,
To say thoult enter friendly.
Throw thy glove,
Or any token of thine honour else,
That thou wilt use the wars as thy redress
And not as our confusion, all thy powers
Shall make their harbour in our town, till we
Have seald thy full desire.
Then theres my glove;
Descend, and open your uncharged ports:
Those enemies of Timons and mine own
Whom you yourselves shall set out for reproof
Fall and no more: and, to atone your fears
With my more noble meaning, not a man
Shall pass his quarter, or offend the stream
Of regular justice in your citys bounds,
But shall be renderd to your public laws
At heaviest answer.
Tis most nobly spoken.
Descend, and keep your words.
The Senators descend, and open the gates
Enter Soldier
My noble general, Timon is dead;
Entombd upon the very hem o the sea;
And on his grave-stone this insculpture, which
With wax I brought away, whose soft impression
Interprets for my poor ignorance.
[Reads the epitaph]  Here lies a
wretched corse, of wretched soul bereft:
Seek not my name: a plague consume you wicked
caitiffs left!
Here lie I, Timon; who, alive, all living men did hate:
Pass by and curse thy fill, but pass and stay
not here thy gait.
These well express in thee thy latter spirits:
Though thou abhorrdst in us our human griefs,
Scorndst our brains flow and those our
droplets which
From niggard nature fall, yet rich conceit
Taught thee to make vast Neptune weep for aye
On thy low grave, on faults forgiven. Dead
Is noble Timon: of whose memory
Hereafter more. Bring me into your city,
And I will use the olive with my sword,
Make war breed peace, make peace stint war, make each
Prescribe to other as each others leech.
Let our drums strike.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Rome. Before the Capitol.
The Tomb of the ANDRONICI appearing; the Tribunes  and Senators aloft. Enter, below, from one side,  SATURNINUS and his Followers; and, from the other side, BASSIANUS and his Followers; with drum and colours
Noble patricians, patrons of my right,
Defend the justice of my cause with arms,
And, countrymen, my loving followers,
Plead my successive title with your swords:
I am his first-born son, that was the last
That wore the imperial diadem of Rome;
Then let my fathers honours live in me,
Nor wrong mine age with this indignity.
Romans, friends, followers, favorers of my right,
If ever Bassianus, Caesars son,
Were gracious in the eyes of royal Rome,
Keep then this passage to the Capitol
And suffer not dishonour to approach
The imperial seat, to virtue consecrate,
To justice, continence and nobility;
But let desert in pure election shine,
And, Romans, fight for freedom in your choice.
Enter MARCUS ANDRONICUS, aloft, with the crown
Princes, that strive by factions and by friends
Ambitiously for rule and empery,
Know that the people of Rome, for whom we stand
A special party, have, by common voice,
In election for the Roman empery,
Chosen Andronicus, surnamed Pius
For many good and great deserts to Rome:
A nobler man, a braver warrior,
Lives not this day within the city walls:
He by the senate is accitd home
From weary wars against the barbarous Goths;
That, with his sons, a terror to our foes,
Hath yoked a nation strong, traind up in arms.
Ten years are spent since first he undertook
This cause of Rome and chastised with arms
Our enemies pride: five times he hath returnd
Bleeding to Rome, bearing his valiant sons
In coffins from the field;
And now at last, laden with horrors spoils,
Returns the good Andronicus to Rome,
Renowned Titus, flourishing in arms.
Let us entreat, by honour of his name,
Whom worthily you would have now succeed.
And in the Capitol and senates right,
Whom you pretend to honour and adore,
That you withdraw you and abate your strength;
Dismiss your followers and, as suitors should,
Plead your deserts in peace and humbleness.
How fair the tribune speaks to calm my thoughts!
Marcus Andronicus, so I do ally
In thy uprightness and integrity,
And so I love and honour thee and thine,
Thy noble brother Titus and his sons,
And her to whom my thoughts are humbled all,
Gracious Lavinia, Romes rich ornament,
That I will here dismiss my loving friends,
And to my fortunes and the peoples favor
Commit my cause in balance to be weighd.
Exeunt the followers of BASSIANUS
Friends, that have been thus forward in my right,
I thank you all and here dismiss you all,
And to the love and favor of my country
Commit myself, my person and the cause.
Exeunt the followers of SATURNINUS
Rome, be as just and gracious unto me
As I am confident and kind to thee.
Open the gates, and let me in.
Tribunes, and me, a poor competitor.
Flourish. SATURNINUS and BASSIANUS go up into the Capitol
Enter a Captain
Romans, make way: the good Andronicus.
Patron of virtue, Romes best champion,
Successful in the battles that he fights,
With honour and with fortune is returnd
From where he circumscribed with his sword,
And brought to yoke, the enemies of Rome.
Drums and trumpets sounded. Enter MARTIUS and  MUTIUS; After them, two Men bearing a coffin  covered with black; then LUCIUS and QUINTUS. After  them, TITUS ANDRONICUS; and then TAMORA, with  ALARBUS, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON, AARON, and other Goths,  prisoners; Soldiers and people following. The Bearers set down the coffin, and TITUS speaks
Hail, Rome, victorious in thy mourning weeds!
Lo, as the bark, that hath discharged her fraught,
Returns with precious jading to the bay
From whence at first she weighd her anchorage,
Cometh Andronicus, bound with laurel boughs,
To re-salute his country with his tears,
Tears of true joy for his return to Rome.
Thou great defender of this Capitol,
Stand gracious to the rites that we intend!
Romans, of five and twenty valiant sons,
Half of the number that King Priam had,
Behold the poor remains, alive and dead!
These that survive let Rome reward with love;
These that I bring unto their latest home,
With burial amongst their ancestors:
Here Goths have given me leave to sheathe my sword.
Titus, unkind and careless of thine own,
Why sufferst thou thy sons, unburied yet,
To hover on the dreadful shore of Styx?
Make way to lay them by their brethren.
The tomb is opened
There greet in silence, as the dead are wont,
And sleep in peace, slain in your countrys wars!
O sacred receptacle of my joys,
Sweet cell of virtue and nobility,
How many sons of mine hast thou in store,
That thou wilt never render to me more!
Give us the proudest prisoner of the Goths,
That we may hew his limbs, and on a pile
Ad manes fratrum sacrifice his flesh,
Before this earthy prison of their bones;
That so the shadows be not unappeased,
Nor we disturbd with prodigies on earth.
I give him you, the noblest that survives,
The eldest son of this distressed queen.
Stay, Roman brethren! Gracious conqueror,
Victorious Titus, rue the tears I shed,
A mothers tears in passion for her son:
And if thy sons were ever dear to thee,
O, think my son to be as dear to me!
Sufficeth not that we are brought to Rome,
To beautify thy triumphs and return,
Captive to thee and to thy Roman yoke,
But must my sons be slaughterd in the streets,
For valiant doings in their countrys cause?
O, if to fight for king and commonweal
Were piety in thine, it is in these.
Andronicus, stain not thy tomb with blood:
Wilt thou draw near the nature of the gods?
Draw near them then in being merciful:
Sweet mercy is nobilitys true badge:
Thrice noble Titus, spare my first-born son.
Patient yourself, madam, and pardon me.
These are their brethren, whom you Goths beheld
Alive and dead, and for their brethren slain
Religiously they ask a sacrifice:
To this your son is markd, and die he must,
To appease their groaning shadows that are gone.
Away with him! and make a fire straight;
And with our swords, upon a pile of wood,
Lets hew his limbs till they be clean consumed.
Exeunt LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS, and MUTIUS, with ALARBUS
O cruel, irreligious piety!
Was ever Scythia half so barbarous?
Oppose not Scythia to ambitious Rome.
Alarbus goes to rest; and we survive
To tremble under Titus threatening looks.
Then, madam, stand resolved, but hope withal
The self-same gods that armd the Queen of Troy
With opportunity of sharp revenge
Upon the Thracian tyrant in his tent,
May favor Tamora, the Queen of Goths--
When Goths were Goths and Tamora was queen--
To quit the bloody wrongs upon her foes.
Re-enter LUCIUS, QUINTUS, MARTIUS and MUTIUS, with their swords bloody
See, lord and father, how we have performd
Our Roman rites: Alarbus limbs are loppd,
And entrails feed the sacrificing fire,
Whose smoke, like incense, doth perfume the sky.
Remaineth nought, but to inter our brethren,
And with loud larums welcome them to Rome.
Let it be so; and let Andronicus
Make this his latest farewell to their souls.
Trumpets sounded, and the coffin laid in the tomb
In peace and honour rest you here, my sons;
Romes readiest champions, repose you here in rest,
Secure from worldly chances and mishaps!
Here lurks no treason, here no envy swells,
Here grow no damned grudges; here are no storms,
No noise, but silence and eternal sleep:
In peace and honour rest you here, my sons!
Enter LAVINIA
In peace and honour live Lord Titus long;
My noble lord and father, live in fame!
Lo, at this tomb my tributary tears
I render, for my brethrens obsequies;
And at thy feet I kneel, with tears of joy,
Shed on the earth, for thy return to Rome:
O, bless me here with thy victorious hand,
Whose fortunes Romes best citizens applaud!
Kind Rome, that hast thus lovingly reserved
The cordial of mine age to glad my heart!
Lavinia, live; outlive thy fathers days,
And fames eternal date, for virtues praise!
Enter, below, MARCUS ANDRONICUS and Tribunes; re-enter SATURNINUS and BASSIANUS, attended
Long live Lord Titus, my beloved brother,
Gracious triumpher in the eyes of Rome!
Thanks, gentle tribune, noble brother Marcus.
And welcome, nephews, from successful wars,
You that survive, and you that sleep in fame!
Fair lords, your fortunes are alike in all,
That in your countrys service drew your swords:
But safer triumph is this funeral pomp,
That hath aspired to Solons happiness
And triumphs over chance in honours bed.
Titus Andronicus, the people of Rome,
Whose friend in justice thou hast ever been,
Send thee by me, their tribune and their trust,
This palliament of white and spotless hue;
And name thee in election for the empire,
With these our late-deceased emperors sons:
Be candidatus then, and put it on,
And help to set a head on headless Rome.
A better head her glorious body fits
Than his that shakes for age and feebleness:
What should I don this robe, and trouble you?
Be chosen with proclamations to-day,
To-morrow yield up rule, resign my life,
And set abroad new business for you all?
Rome, I have been thy soldier forty years,
And led my countrys strength successfully,
And buried one and twenty valiant sons,
Knighted in field, slain manfully in arms,
In right and service of their noble country
Give me a staff of honour for mine age,
But not a sceptre to control the world:
Upright he held it, lords, that held it last.
Titus, thou shalt obtain and ask the empery.
Proud and ambitious tribune, canst thou tell?
Patience, Prince Saturninus.
Romans, do me right:
Patricians, draw your swords: and sheathe them not
Till Saturninus be Romes emperor.
Andronicus, would thou wert shippd to hell,
Rather than rob me of the peoples hearts!
Proud Saturnine, interrupter of the good
That noble-minded Titus means to thee!
Content thee, prince; I will restore to thee
The peoples hearts, and wean them from themselves.
Andronicus, I do not flatter thee,
But honour thee, and will do till I die:
My faction if thou strengthen with thy friends,
I will most thankful be; and thanks to men
Of noble minds is honourable meed.
People of Rome, and peoples tribunes here,
I ask your voices and your suffrages:
Will you bestow them friendly on Andronicus?
To gratify the good Andronicus,
And gratulate his safe return to Rome,
The people will accept whom he admits.
Tribunes, I thank you: and this suit I make,
That you create your emperors eldest son,
Lord Saturnine; whose virtues will, I hope,
Reflect on Rome as Titans rays on earth,
And ripen justice in this commonweal:
Then, if you will elect by my advice,
Crown him and say Long live our emperor!
With voices and applause of every sort,
Patricians and plebeians, we create
Lord Saturninus Romes great emperor,
And say Long live our Emperor Saturnine!
A long flourish till they come down
Titus Andronicus, for thy favors done
To us in our election this day,
I give thee thanks in part of thy deserts,
And will with deeds requite thy gentleness:
And, for an onset, Titus, to advance
Thy name and honourable family,
Lavinia will I make my empress,
Romes royal mistress, mistress of my heart,
And in the sacred Pantheon her espouse:
Tell me, Andronicus, doth this motion please thee?
It doth, my worthy lord; and in this match
I hold me highly honourd of your grace:
And here in sight of Rome to Saturnine,
King and commander of our commonweal,
The wide worlds emperor, do I consecrate
My sword, my chariot and my prisoners;
Presents well worthy Romes imperial lord:
Receive them then, the tribute that I owe,
Mine honours ensigns humbled at thy feet.
Thanks, noble Titus, father of my life!
How proud I am of thee and of thy gifts
Rome shall record, and when I do forget
The least of these unspeakable deserts,
Romans, forget your fealty to me.
[To TAMORA]  Now, madam, are you prisoner to
an emperor;
To him that, for your honour and your state,
Will use you nobly and your followers.
A goodly lady, trust me; of the hue
That I would choose, were I to choose anew.
Clear up, fair queen, that cloudy countenance:
Though chance of war hath wrought this change of cheer,
Thou comest not to be made a scorn in Rome:
Princely shall be thy usage every way.
Rest on my word, and let not discontent
Daunt all your hopes: madam, he comforts you
Can make you greater than the Queen of Goths.
Lavinia, you are not displeased with this?
Not I, my lord; sith true nobility
Warrants these words in princely courtesy.
Thanks, sweet Lavinia. Romans, let us go;
Ransomless here we set our prisoners free:
Proclaim our honours, lords, with trump and drum.
Flourish. SATURNINUS courts TAMORA in dumb show
Lord Titus, by your leave, this maid is mine.
Seizing LAVINIA
How, sir! are you in earnest then, my lord?
Ay, noble Titus; and resolved withal
To do myself this reason and this right.
Suum cuique is our Roman justice:
This prince in justice seizeth but his own.
And that he will, and shall, if Lucius live.
Traitors, avaunt! Where is the emperors guard?
Treason, my lord! Lavinia is surprised!
Surprised! by whom?
By him that justly may
Bear his betrothd from all the world away.
Exeunt BASSIANUS and MARCUS with LAVINIA
Brothers, help to convey her hence away,
And with my sword Ill keep this door safe.
Exeunt LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS
Follow, my lord, and Ill soon bring her back.
My lord, you pass not here.
What, villain boy!
Barrst me my way in Rome?
Stabbing MUTIUS
Help, Lucius, help!
Dies
During the fray, SATURNINUS, TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON and AARON go out and re-enter, above
Re-enter LUCIUS
My lord, you are unjust, and, more than so,
In wrongful quarrel you have slain your son.
Nor thou, nor he, are any sons of mine;
My sons would never so dishonour me:
Traitor, restore Lavinia to the emperor.
Dead, if you will; but not to be his wife,
That is anothers lawful promised love.
Exit
No, Titus, no; the emperor needs her not,
Nor her, nor thee, nor any of thy stock:
Ill trust, by leisure, him that mocks me once;
Thee never, nor thy traitorous haughty sons,
Confederates all thus to dishonour me.
Was there none else in Rome to make a stale,
But Saturnine? Full well, Andronicus,
Agree these deeds with that proud brag of thine,
That saidst I beggd the empire at thy hands.
O monstrous! what reproachful words are these?
But go thy ways; go, give that changing piece
To him that flourishd for her with his sword
A valiant son-in-law thou shalt enjoy;
One fit to bandy with thy lawless sons,
To ruffle in the commonwealth of Rome.
These words are razors to my wounded heart.
And therefore, lovely Tamora, queen of Goths,
That like the stately Phoebe mongst her nymphs
Dost overshine the gallantst dames of Rome,
If thou be pleased with this my sudden choice,
Behold, I choose thee, Tamora, for my bride,
And will create thee empress of Rome,
Speak, Queen of Goths, dost thou applaud my choice?
And here I swear by all the Roman gods,
Sith priest and holy water are so near
And tapers burn so bright and every thing
In readiness for Hymenaeus stand,
I will not re-salute the streets of Rome,
Or climb my palace, till from forth this place
I lead espoused my bride along with me.
And here, in sight of heaven, to Rome I swear,
If Saturnine advance the Queen of Goths,
She will a handmaid be to his desires,
A loving nurse, a mother to his youth.
Ascend, fair queen, Pantheon. Lords, accompany
Your noble emperor and his lovely bride,
Sent by the heavens for Prince Saturnine,
Whose wisdom hath her fortune conquered:
There shall we consummate our spousal rites.
Exeunt all but TITUS
I am not bid to wait upon this bride.
Titus, when wert thou wont to walk alone,
Dishonourd thus, and challenged of wrongs?
Re-enter MARCUS, LUCIUS, QUINTUS, and MARTIUS
O Titus, see, O, see what thou hast done!
In a bad quarrel slain a virtuous son.
No, foolish tribune, no; no son of mine,
Nor thou, nor these, confederates in the deed
That hath dishonourd all our family;
Unworthy brother, and unworthy sons!
But let us give him burial, as becomes;
Give Mutius burial with our brethren.
Traitors, away! he rests not in this tomb:
This monument five hundred years hath stood,
Which I have sumptuously re-edified:
Here none but soldiers and Romes servitors
Repose in fame; none basely slain in brawls:
Bury him where you can; he comes not here.
My lord, this is impiety in you:
My nephew Mutius deeds do plead for him
He must be buried with his brethren.
And shall, or him we will accompany.
And shall! what villain was it that spake
that word?
He that would vouch it in any place but here.
What, would you bury him in my despite?
No, noble Titus, but entreat of thee
To pardon Mutius and to bury him.
Marcus, even thou hast struck upon my crest,
And, with these boys, mine honour thou hast wounded:
My foes I do repute you every one;
So, trouble me no more, but get you gone.
He is not with himself; let us withdraw.
Not I, till Mutius bones be buried.
MARCUS and the Sons of TITUS kneel
Brother, for in that name doth nature plead,--
Father, and in that name doth nature speak,--
Speak thou no more, if all the rest will speed.
Renowned Titus, more than half my soul,--
Dear father, soul and substance of us all,--
Suffer thy brother Marcus to inter
His noble nephew here in virtues nest,
That died in honour and Lavinias cause.
Thou art a Roman; be not barbarous:
The Greeks upon advice did bury Ajax
That slew himself; and wise Laertes son
Did graciously plead for his funerals:
Let not young Mutius, then, that was thy joy
Be barrd his entrance here.
Rise, Marcus, rise.
The dismallst day is this that eer I saw,
To be dishonourd by my sons in Rome!
Well, bury him, and bury me the next.
MUTIUS is put into the tomb
There lie thy bones, sweet Mutius, with thy friends,
Till we with trophies do adorn thy tomb.
[Kneeling]  No man shed tears for noble Mutius;
He lives in fame that died in virtues cause.
My lord, to step out of these dreary dumps,
How comes it that the subtle Queen of Goths
Is of a sudden thus advanced in Rome?
I know not, Marcus; but I know it is,
Whether by device or no, the heavens can tell:
Is she not then beholding to the man
That brought her for this high good turn so far?
Yes, and will nobly him remunerate.
Flourish. Re-enter, from one side, SATURNINUS  attended, TAMORA, DEMETRIUS, CHIRON and AARON; from the other, BASSIANUS, LAVINIA, and others
So, Bassianus, you have playd your prize:
God give you joy, sir, of your gallant bride!
And you of yours, my lord! I say no more,
Nor wish no less; and so, I take my leave.
Traitor, if Rome have law or we have power,
Thou and thy faction shall repent this rape.
Rape, call you it, my lord, to seize my own,
My truth-betrothed love and now my wife?
But let the laws of Rome determine all;
Meanwhile I am possessd of that is mine.
Tis good, sir: you are very short with us;
But, if we live, well be as sharp with you.
My lord, what I have done, as best I may,
Answer I must and shall do with my life.
Only thus much I give your grace to know:
By all the duties that I owe to Rome,
This noble gentleman, Lord Titus here,
Is in opinion and in honour wrongd;
That in the rescue of Lavinia
With his own hand did slay his youngest son,
In zeal to you and highly moved to wrath
To be controlld in that he frankly gave:
Receive him, then, to favor, Saturnine,
That hath expressd himself in all his deeds
A father and a friend to thee and Rome.
Prince Bassianus, leave to plead my deeds:
Tis thou and those that have dishonourd me.
Rome and the righteous heavens be my judge,
How I have loved and honourd Saturnine!
My worthy lord, if ever Tamora
Were gracious in those princely eyes of thine,
Then hear me speak in indifferently for all;
And at my suit, sweet, pardon what is past.
What, madam! be dishonourd openly,
And basely put it up without revenge?
Not so, my lord; the gods of Rome forfend
I should be author to dishonour you!
But on mine honour dare I undertake
For good Lord Titus innocence in all;
Whose fury not dissembled speaks his griefs:
Then, at my suit, look graciously on him;
Lose not so noble a friend on vain suppose,
Nor with sour looks afflict his gentle heart.
Aside to SATURNINUS
be won at last;
Dissemble all your griefs and discontents:
You are but newly planted in your throne;
Lest, then, the people, and patricians too,
Upon a just survey, take Titus part,
And so supplant you for ingratitude,
Which Rome reputes to be a heinous sin,
Yield at entreats; and then let me alone:
Ill find a day to massacre them all
And raze their faction and their family,
The cruel father and his traitorous sons,
To whom I sued for my dear sons life,
And make them know what tis to let a queen
Kneel in the streets and beg for grace in vain.
Aloud
Come, come, sweet emperor; come, Andronicus;
Take up this good old man, and cheer the heart
That dies in tempest of thy angry frown.
Rise, Titus, rise; my empress hath prevaild.
I thank your majesty, and her, my lord:
These words, these looks, infuse new life in me.
Titus, I am incorporate in Rome,
A Roman now adopted happily,
And must advise the emperor for his good.
This day all quarrels die, Andronicus;
And let it be mine honour, good my lord,
That I have reconciled your friends and you.
For you, Prince Bassianus, I have passd
My word and promise to the emperor,
That you will be more mild and tractable.
And fear not lords, and you, Lavinia;
By my advice, all humbled on your knees,
You shall ask pardon of his majesty.
We do, and vow to heaven and to his highness,
That what we did was mildly as we might,
Tendering our sisters honour and our own.
That, on mine honour, here I do protest.
Away, and talk not; trouble us no more.
Nay, nay, sweet emperor, we must all be friends:
The tribune and his nephews kneel for grace;
I will not be denied: sweet heart, look back.
Marcus, for thy sake and thy brothers here,
And at my lovely Tamoras entreats,
I do remit these young mens heinous faults: Stand up.
Lavinia, though you left me like a churl,
I found a friend, and sure as death I swore
I would not part a bachelor from the priest.
Come, if the emperors court can feast two brides,
You are my guest, Lavinia, and your friends.
This day shall be a love-day, Tamora.
To-morrow, an it please your majesty
To hunt the panther and the hart with me,
With horn and hound well give your grace bonjour.
Be it so, Titus, and gramercy too.
Flourish. Exeunt
ACT II
