Welcome, ye warlike Goths; welcome, Lucius;
And welcome, all: although the cheer be poor,
Twill fill your stomachs; please you eat of it.
Why art thou thus attired, Andronicus?
Because I would be sure to have all well,
To entertain your highness and your empress.
We are beholding to you, good Andronicus.
An if your highness knew my heart, you were.
My lord the emperor, resolve me this:
Was it well done of rash Virginius
To slay his daughter with his own right hand,
Because she was enforced, staind, and deflowerd?
It was, Andronicus.
Your reason, mighty lord?
Because the girl should not survive her shame,
And by her presence still renew his sorrows.
A reason mighty, strong, and effectual;
A pattern, precedent, and lively warrant,
For me, most wretched, to perform the like.
Die, die, Lavinia, and thy shame with thee;
Kills LAVINIA
And, with thy shame, thy fathers sorrow die!
What hast thou done, unnatural and unkind?
Killd her, for whom my tears have made me blind.
I am as woful as Virginius was,
And have a thousand times more cause than he
To do this outrage: and it now is done.
What, was she ravishd? tell who did the deed.
Willt please you eat? willt please your
highness feed?
Why hast thou slain thine only daughter thus?
Not I; twas Chiron and Demetrius:
They ravishd her, and cut away her tongue;
And they, twas they, that did her all this wrong.
Go fetch them hither to us presently.
Why, there they are both, baked in that pie;
Whereof their mother daintily hath fed,
Eating the flesh that she herself hath bred.
Tis true, tis true; witness my knifes sharp point.
Kills TAMORA
Die, frantic wretch, for this accursed deed!
Kills TITUS
Can the sons eye behold his father bleed?
Theres meed for meed, death for a deadly deed!
Kills SATURNINUS. A great tumult. LUCIUS, MARCUS, and others go up into the balcony
You sad-faced men, people and sons of Rome,
By uproar severd, like a flight of fowl
Scatterd by winds and high tempestuous gusts,
O, let me teach you how to knit again
This scatterd corn  into one mutual sheaf,
These broken limbs again into one body;
Lest Rome herself be bane unto herself,
And she whom mighty kingdoms courtsy to,
Like a forlorn and desperate castaway,
Do shameful execution on herself.
But if my frosty signs and chaps of age,
Grave witnesses of true experience,
Cannot induce you to attend my words,
To LUCIUS
Speak, Romes dear friend, as erst our ancestor,
When with his solemn tongue he did discourse
To love-sick Didos sad attending ear
The story of that baleful burning night
When subtle Greeks surprised King Priams Troy,
Tell us what Sinon hath bewitchd our ears,
Or who hath brought the fatal engine in
That gives our Troy, our Rome, the civil wound.
My heart is not compact of flint nor steel;
Nor can I utter all our bitter grief,
But floods of tears will drown my oratory,
And break my utterance, even in the time
When it should move you to attend me most,
Lending your kind commiseration.
Here is a captain, let him tell the tale;
Your hearts will throb and weep to hear him speak.
Then, noble auditory, be it known to you,
That cursed Chiron and Demetrius
Were they that murdered our emperors brother;
And they it were that ravished our sister:
For their fell faults our brothers were beheaded;
Our fathers tears despised, and basely cozend
Of that true hand that fought Romes quarrel out,
And sent her enemies unto the grave.
Lastly, myself unkindly banished,
The gates shut on me, and turnd weeping out,
To beg relief among Romes enemies:
Who drownd their enmity in my true tears.
And oped their arms to embrace me as a friend.
I am the turned forth, be it known to you,
That have preserved her welfare in my blood;
And from her bosom took the enemys point,
Sheathing the steel in my adventurous body.
Alas, you know I am no vaunter, I;
My scars can witness, dumb although they are,
That my report is just and full of truth.
But, soft! methinks I do digress too much,
Citing my worthless praise: O, pardon me;
For when no friends are by, men praise themselves.
Now is my turn to speak. Behold this child:
Pointing to the Child in the arms of an Attendant
Of this was Tamora delivered;
The issue of an irreligious Moor,
Chief architect and plotter of these woes:
The villain is alive in Titus house,
And as he is, to witness this is true.
Now judge what cause had Titus to revenge
These wrongs, unspeakable, past patience,
Or more than any living man could bear.
Now you have heard the truth, what say you, Romans?
Have we done aught amiss,--show us wherein,
And, from the place where you behold us now,
The poor remainder of Andronici
Will, hand in hand, all headlong cast us down.
And on the ragged stones beat forth our brains,
And make a mutual closure of our house.
Speak, Romans, speak; and if you say we shall,
Lo, hand in hand, Lucius and I will fall.
Come, come, thou reverend man of Rome,
And bring our emperor gently in thy hand,
Lucius our emperor; for well I know
The common voice do cry it shall be so.
Lucius, all hail, Romes royal emperor!
Go, go into old Titus sorrowful house,
To Attendants
And hither hale that misbelieving Moor,
To be adjudged some direful slaughtering death,
As punishment for his most wicked life.
Exeunt Attendants
LUCIUS, MARCUS, and the others descend
Lucius, all hail, Romes gracious governor!
Thanks, gentle Romans: may I govern so,
To heal Romes harms, and wipe away her woe!
But, gentle people, give me aim awhile,
For nature puts me to a heavy task:
Stand all aloof: but, uncle, draw you near,
To shed obsequious tears upon this trunk.
O, take this warm kiss on thy pale cold lips,
Kissing TITUS
These sorrowful drops upon thy blood-staind face,
The last true duties of thy noble son!
Tear for tear, and loving kiss for kiss,
Thy brother Marcus tenders on thy lips:
O were the sum of these that I should pay
Countless and infinite, yet would I pay them!
Come hither, boy; come, come, and learn of us
To melt in showers: thy grandsire loved thee well:
Many a time he danced thee on his knee,
Sung thee asleep, his loving breast thy pillow:
Many a matter hath he told to thee,
Meet and agreeing with thine infancy;
In that respect, then, like a loving child,
Shed yet some small drops from thy tender spring,
Because kind nature doth require it so:
Friends should associate friends in grief and woe:
Bid him farewell; commit him to the grave;
Do him that kindness, and take leave of him.
O grandsire, grandsire! even with all my heart
Would I were dead, so you did live again!
O Lord, I cannot speak to him for weeping;
My tears will choke me, if I ope my mouth.
Re-enter Attendants with AARON
You sad Andronici, have done with woes:
Give sentence on this execrable wretch,
That hath been breeder of these dire events.
Set him breast-deep in earth, and famish him;
There let him stand, and rave, and cry for food;
If any one relieves or pities him,
For the offence he dies. This is our doom:
Some stay to see him fastend in the earth.
O, why should wrath be mute, and fury dumb?
I am no baby, I, that with base prayers
I should repent the evils I have done:
Ten thousand worse than ever yet I did
Would I perform, if I might have my will;
If one good deed in all my life I did,
I do repent it from my very soul.
Some loving friends convey the emperor hence,
And give him burial in his fathers grave:
My father and Lavinia shall forthwith
Be closed in our households monument.
As for that heinous tiger, Tamora,
No funeral rite, nor man m mourning weeds,
No mournful bell shall ring her burial;
But throw her forth to beasts and birds of prey:
Her life was beast-like, and devoid of pity;
And, being so, shall have like want of pity.
See justice done on Aaron, that damnd Moor,
By whom our heavy haps had their beginning:
Then, afterwards, to order well the state,
That like events may neer it ruinate.
Exeunt
ACT I
PROLOGUE
In Troy, there lies the scene. From isles of Greece
The princes orgulous, their high blood chafed,
Have to the port of Athens sent their ships,
Fraught with the ministers and instruments
Of cruel war: sixty and nine, that wore
Their crownets regal, from the Athenian bay
Put forth toward Phrygia; and their vow is made
To ransack Troy, within whose strong immures
The ravishd Helen, Menelaus queen,
With wanton Paris sleeps; and thats the quarrel.
To Tenedos they come;
And the deep-drawing barks do there disgorge
Their warlike fraughtage: now on Dardan plains
The fresh and yet unbruised Greeks do pitch
Their brave pavilions: Priams six-gated city,
Dardan, and Tymbria, Helias, Chetas, Troien,
And Antenorides, with massy staples
And corresponsive and fulfilling bolts,
Sperr up the sons of Troy.
Now expectation, tickling skittish spirits,
On one and other side, Trojan and Greek,
Sets all on hazard: and hither am I come
A prologue armd, but not in confidence
Of authors pen or actors voice, but suited
In like conditions as our argument,
To tell you, fair beholders, that our play
Leaps oer the vaunt and firstlings of those broils,
Beginning in the middle, starting thence away
To what may be digested in a play.
Like or find fault; do as your pleasures are:
Now good or bad, tis but the chance of war.
SCENE I. Troy. Before Priams palace.
Enter TROILUS armed, and PANDARUS
Call here my varlet; Ill unarm again:
Why should I war without the walls of Troy,
That find such cruel battle here within?
Each Trojan that is master of his heart,
Let him to field; Troilus, alas! hath none.
Will this gear neer be mended?
The Greeks are strong and skilful to their strength,
Fierce to their skill and to their fierceness valiant;
But I am weaker than a womans tear,
Tamer than sleep, fonder than ignorance,
Less valiant than the virgin in the night
And skilless as unpractised infancy.
Well, I have told you enough of this: for my part,
Ill not meddle nor make no further. He that will
have a cake out of the wheat must needs tarry the grinding.
Have I not tarried?
Ay, the grinding; but you must tarry
the bolting.
Have I not tarried?
Ay, the bolting, but you must tarry the leavening.
Still have I tarried.
Ay, to the leavening; but heres yet in the word
hereafter the kneading, the making of the cake, the
heating of the oven and the baking; nay, you must
stay the cooling too, or you may chance to burn your lips.
Patience herself, what goddess eer she be,
Doth lesser blench at sufferance than I do.
At Priams royal table do I sit;
And when fair Cressid comes into my thoughts,--
So, traitor! When she comes! When is she thence?
Well, she looked yesternight fairer than ever I saw
her look, or any woman else.
I was about to tell thee:--when my heart,
As wedged with a sigh, would rive in twain,
Lest Hector or my father should perceive me,
I have, as when the sun doth light a storm,
Buried this sigh in wrinkle of a smile:
But sorrow, that is couchd in seeming gladness,
Is like that mirth fate turns to sudden sadness.
An her hair were not somewhat darker than Helens--
well, go to--there were no more comparison between
the women: but, for my part, she is my kinswoman; I
would not, as they term it, praise her: but I would
somebody had heard her talk yesterday, as I did. I
will not dispraise your sister Cassandras wit, but--
O Pandarus! I tell thee, Pandarus,--
When I do tell thee, there my hopes lie drownd,
Reply not in how many fathoms deep
They lie indrenchd. I tell thee I am mad
In Cressids love: thou answerst she is fair;
Pourst in the open ulcer of my heart
Her eyes, her hair, her cheek, her gait, her voice,
Handlest in thy discourse, O, that her hand,
In whose comparison all whites are ink,
Writing their own reproach, to whose soft seizure
The cygnets down is harsh and spirit of sense
Hard as the palm of ploughman: this thou tellst me,
As true thou tellst me, when I say I love her;
But, saying thus, instead of oil and balm,
Thou layst in every gash that love hath given me
The knife that made it.
I speak no more than truth.
Thou dost not speak so much.
Faith, Ill not meddle int. Let her be as she is:
if she be fair, tis the better for her; an she be
not, she has the mends in her own hands.
Good Pandarus, how now, Pandarus!
I have had my labour for my travail; ill-thought on of
her and ill-thought on of you; gone between and
between, but small thanks for my labour.
What, art thou angry, Pandarus? what, with me?
Because shes kin to me, therefore shes not so fair
as Helen: an she were not kin to me, she would be as
fair on Friday as Helen is on Sunday. But what care
I? I care not an she were a black-a-moor; tis all one to me.
Say I she is not fair?
I do not care whether you do or no. Shes a fool to
stay behind her father; let her to the Greeks; and so
Ill tell her the next time I see her: for my part,
Ill meddle nor make no more i the matter.
Pandarus,--
Not I.
Sweet Pandarus,--
Pray you, speak no more to me: I will leave all as I
found it, and there an end.
Exit PANDARUS. An alarum
Peace, you ungracious clamours! peace, rude sounds!
Fools on both sides! Helen must needs be fair,
When with your blood you daily paint her thus.
I cannot fight upon this argument;
It is too starved a subject for my sword.
But Pandarus,--O gods, how do you plague me!
I cannot come to Cressid but by Pandar;
And hes as tetchy to be wood to woo.
As she is stubborn-chaste against all suit.
Tell me, Apollo, for thy Daphnes love,
What Cressid is, what Pandar, and what we?
Her bed is India; there she lies, a pearl:
Between our Ilium and where she resides,
Let it be calld the wild and wandering flood,
Ourself the merchant, and this sailing Pandar
Our doubtful hope, our convoy and our bark.
Alarum. Enter AENEAS
How now, Prince Troilus! wherefore not afield?
Because not there: this womans answer sorts,
For womanish it is to be from thence.
What news, AEneas, from the field to-day?
That Paris is returned home and hurt.
By whom, AEneas?
Troilus, by Menelaus.
Let Paris bleed; tis but a scar to scorn;
Paris is gored with Menelaus horn.
Alarum
Hark, what good sport is out of town to-day!
Better at home, if would I might were may.
But to the sport abroad: are you bound thither?
In all swift haste.
Come, go we then together.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The Same. A street.
Enter CRESSIDA and ALEXANDER
Who were those went by?
Queen Hecuba and Helen.
And whither go they?
Up to the eastern tower,
Whose height commands as subject all the vale,
To see the battle. Hector, whose patience
Is, as a virtue, fixd, to-day was moved:
He chid Andromache and struck his armourer,
And, like as there were husbandry in war,
Before the sun rose he was harnessd light,
And to the field goes he; where every flower
Did, as a prophet, weep what it foresaw
In Hectors wrath.
What was his cause of anger?
The noise goes, this: there is among the Greeks
A lord of Trojan blood, nephew to Hector;
They call him Ajax.
Good; and what of him?
They say he is a very man per se,
And stands alone.
So do all men, unless they are drunk, sick, or have no legs.
This man, lady, hath robbed many beasts of their
particular additions; he is as valiant as the lion,
churlish as the bear, slow as the elephant: a man
into whom nature hath so crowded humours that his
valour is crushed into folly, his folly sauced with
discretion: there is no man hath a virtue that he
hath not a glimpse of, nor any man an attaint but he
carries some stain of it: he is melancholy without
cause, and merry against the hair: he hath the
joints of every thing, but everything so out of joint
that he is a gouty Briareus, many hands and no use,
or purblind Argus, all eyes and no sight.
But how should this man, that makes
me smile, make Hector angry?
They say he yesterday coped Hector in the battle and
struck him down, the disdain and shame whereof hath
ever since kept Hector fasting and waking.
Who comes here?
Madam, your uncle Pandarus.
Enter PANDARUS
Hectors a gallant man.
As may be in the world, lady.
Whats that? whats that?
Good morrow, uncle Pandarus.
Good morrow, cousin Cressid: what do you talk of?
Good morrow, Alexander. How do you, cousin? When
were you at Ilium?
This morning, uncle.
What were you talking of when I came? Was Hector
armed and gone ere ye came to Ilium? Helen was not
up, was she?
Hector was gone, but Helen was not up.
Even so: Hector was stirring early.
That were we talking of, and of his anger.
Was he angry?
So he says here.
True, he was so: I know the cause too: hell lay
about him to-day, I can tell them that: and theres
Troilus will not come far behind him: let them take
heed of Troilus, I can tell them that too.
What, is he angry too?
Who, Troilus? Troilus is the better man of the two.
O Jupiter! theres no comparison.
What, not between Troilus and Hector? Do you know a
man if you see him?
Ay, if I ever saw him before and knew him.
Well, I say Troilus is Troilus.
Then you say as I say; for, I am sure, he is not Hector.
No, nor Hector is not Troilus in some degrees.
Tis just to each of them; he is himself.
Himself! Alas, poor Troilus! I would he were.
So he is.
Condition, I had gone barefoot to India.
He is not Hector.
Himself! no, hes not himself: would a were
himself! Well, the gods are above; time must friend
or end: well, Troilus, well: I would my heart were
in her body. No, Hector is not a better man than Troilus.
Excuse me.
He is elder.
Pardon me, pardon me.
Th others not come tot; you shall tell me another
tale, when th others come tot. Hector shall not
have his wit this year.
He shall not need it, if he have his own.
Nor his qualities.
No matter.
Nor his beauty.
Twould not become him; his owns better.
You have no judgment, niece: Helen
herself swore th other day, that Troilus, for
a brown favour--for so tis, I must confess,--
not brown neither,--
No, but brown.
Faith, to say truth, brown and not brown.
To say the truth, true and not true.
She praised his complexion above Paris.
Why, Paris hath colour enough.
So he has.
Then Troilus should have too much: if she praised
him above, his complexion is higher than his; he
having colour enough, and the other higher, is too
flaming a praise for a good complexion. I had as
lief Helens golden tongue had commended Troilus for
a copper nose.
I swear to you. I think Helen loves him better than Paris.
Then shes a merry Greek indeed.
Nay, I am sure she does. She came to him th other
day into the compassed window,--and, you know, he
has not past three or four hairs on his chin,--
Indeed, a tapsters arithmetic may soon bring his
particulars therein to a total.
Why, he is very young: and yet will he, within
three pound, lift as much as his brother Hector.
Is he so young a man and so old a lifter?
But to prove to you that Helen loves him: she came
and puts me her white hand to his cloven chin--
Juno have mercy! how came it cloven?
Why, you know tis dimpled: I think his smiling
becomes him better than any man in all Phrygia.
O, he smiles valiantly.
Does he not?
O yes, an twere a cloud in autumn.
Why, go to, then: but to prove to you that Helen
loves Troilus,--
Troilus will stand to the proof, if youll
prove it so.
Troilus! why, he esteems her no more than I esteem
an addle egg.
If you love an addle egg as well as you love an idle
head, you would eat chickens i the shell.
I cannot choose but laugh, to think how she tickled
his chin: indeed, she has a marvellous white hand, I
must needs confess,--
Without the rack.
And she takes upon her to spy a white hair on his chin.
Alas, poor chin! many a wart is richer.
But there was such laughing! Queen Hecuba laughed
that her eyes ran oer.
With mill-stones.
And Cassandra laughed.
But there was more temperate fire under the pot of
her eyes: did her eyes run oer too?
And Hector laughed.
At what was all this laughing?
Marry, at the white hair that Helen spied on Troilus chin.
Ant had been a green hair, I should have laughed
too.
They laughed not so much at the hair as at his pretty answer.
What was his answer?
Quoth she, Heres but two and fifty hairs on your
chin, and one of them is white.
This is her question.
Thats true; make no question of that. Two and
fifty hairs quoth he, and one white: that white
hair is my father, and all the rest are his sons.
Jupiter! quoth she, which of these hairs is Paris,
my husband? The forked one, quoth he, pluckt
out, and give it him. But there was such laughing!
and Helen so blushed, an Paris so chafed, and all the
rest so laughed, that it passed.
So let it now; for it has been while going by.
Well, cousin. I told you a thing yesterday; think ont.
So I do.
Ill be sworn tis true; he will weep you, an twere
a man born in April.
And Ill spring up in his tears, an twere a nettle
against May.
A retreat sounded
Hark! they are coming from the field: shall we
stand up here, and see them as they pass toward
Ilium? good niece, do, sweet niece Cressida.
At your pleasure.
Here, here, heres an excellent place; here we may
see most bravely: Ill tell you them all by their
names as they pass by; but mark Troilus above the rest.
Speak not so loud.
AENEAS passes
Thats AEneas: is not that a brave man? hes one of
the flowers of Troy, I can tell you: but mark
Troilus; you shall see anon.
ANTENOR passes
Whos that?
Thats Antenor: he has a shrewd wit, I can tell you;
and hes a man good enough, hes one o the soundest
judgments in whosoever, and a proper man of person.
When comes Troilus? Ill show you Troilus anon: if
he see me, you shall see him nod at me.
Will he give you the nod?
You shall see.
If he do, the rich shall have more.
HECTOR passes
Thats Hector, that, that, look you, that; theres a
fellow! Go thy way, Hector! Theres a brave man,
niece. O brave Hector! Look how he looks! theres
a countenance! ist not a brave man?
O, a brave man!
Is a not? it does a mans heart good. Look you
what hacks are on his helmet! look you yonder, do
you see? look you there: theres no jesting;
theres laying on, taket off who will, as they say:
there be hacks!
Be those with swords?
Swords! any thing, he cares not; an the devil come
to him, its all one: by Gods lid, it does ones
heart good. Yonder comes Paris, yonder comes Paris.
PARIS passes
Look ye yonder, niece; ist not a gallant man too,
ist not? Why, this is brave now. Who said he came
hurt home to-day? hes not hurt: why, this will do
Helens heart good now, ha! Would I could see
Troilus now! You shall see Troilus anon.
HELENUS passes
Whos that?
Thats Helenus. I marvel where Troilus is. Thats
Helenus. I think he went not forth to-day. Thats Helenus.
Can Helenus fight, uncle?
Helenus? no. Yes, hell fight indifferent well. I
marvel where Troilus is. Hark! do you not hear the
people cry Troilus? Helenus is a priest.
What sneaking fellow comes yonder?
TROILUS passes
Where? yonder? thats Deiphobus. Tis Troilus!
theres a man, niece! Hem! Brave Troilus! the
prince of chivalry!
Peace, for shame, peace!
Mark him; note him. O brave Troilus! Look well upon
him, niece: look you how his sword is bloodied, and
his helm more hacked than Hectors, and how he looks,
and how he goes! O admirable youth! he neer saw
three and twenty. Go thy way, Troilus, go thy way!
Had I a sister were a grace, or a daughter a goddess,
he should take his choice. O admirable man! Paris?
Paris is dirt to him; and, I warrant, Helen, to
change, would give an eye to boot.
Here come more.
Forces pass
Asses, fools, dolts! chaff and bran, chaff and bran!
porridge after meat! I could live and die i the
eyes of Troilus. Neer look, neer look: the eagles
are gone: crows and daws, crows and daws! I had
rather be such a man as Troilus than Agamemnon and
all Greece.
There is among the Greeks Achilles, a better man than Troilus.
Achilles! a drayman, a porter, a very camel.
Well, well.
Well, well! why, have you any discretion? have
you any eyes? Do you know what a man is? Is not
birth, beauty, good shape, discourse, manhood,
learning, gentleness, virtue, youth, liberality,
and such like, the spice and salt that season a man?
Ay, a minced man: and then to be baked with no date
in the pie, for then the mans dates out.
You are such a woman! one knows not at what ward you
lie.
Upon my back, to defend my belly; upon my wit, to
defend my wiles; upon my secrecy, to defend mine
honesty; my mask, to defend my beauty; and you, to
defend all these: and at all these wards I lie, at a
thousand watches.
Say one of your watches.
Nay, Ill watch you for that; and thats one of the
chiefest of them too: if I cannot ward what I would
not have hit, I can watch you for telling how I took
the blow; unless it swell past hiding, and then its
past watching.
You are such another!
Enter Troiluss Boy
Sir, my lord would instantly speak with you.
Where?
At your own house; there he unarms him.
Good boy, tell him I come.
Exit boy
I doubt he be hurt. Fare ye well, good niece.
Adieu, uncle.
Ill be with you, niece, by and by.
To bring, uncle?
Ay, a token from Troilus.
By the same token, you are a bawd.
Exit PANDARUS
Words, vows, gifts, tears, and loves full sacrifice,
He offers in anothers enterprise;
But more in Troilus thousand fold I see
Than in the glass of Pandars praise may be;
Yet hold I off. Women are angels, wooing:
Things won are done; joys soul lies in the doing.
That she beloved knows nought that knows not this:
Men prize the thing ungaind more than it is:
That she was never yet that ever knew
Love got so sweet as when desire did sue.
Therefore this maxim out of love I teach:
Achievement is command; ungaind, beseech:
Then though my hearts content firm love doth bear,
Nothing of that shall from mine eyes appear.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The Grecian camp. Before Agamemnons tent.
Sennet. Enter AGAMEMNON, NESTOR, ULYSSES, MENELAUS, and others
Princes,
What grief hath set the jaundice on your cheeks?
The ample proposition that hope makes
In all designs begun on earth below
Fails in the promised largeness: cheques and disasters
Grow in the veins of actions highest reard,
As knots, by the conflux of meeting sap,
Infect the sound pine and divert his grain
Tortive and errant from his course of growth.
Nor, princes, is it matter new to us
That we come short of our suppose so far
That after seven years siege yet Troy walls stand;
Sith every action that hath gone before,
Whereof we have record, trial did draw
Bias and thwart, not answering the aim,
And that unbodied figure of the thought
That gavet surmised shape. Why then, you princes,
Do you with cheeks abashd behold our works,
And call them shames? which are indeed nought else
But the protractive trials of great Jove
To find persistive constancy in men:
The fineness of which metal is not found
In fortunes love; for then the bold and coward,
The wise and fool, the artist and unread,
The hard and soft seem all affined and kin:
But, in the wind and tempest of her frown,
Distinction, with a broad and powerful fan,
Puffing at all, winnows the light away;
And what hath mass or matter, by itself
Lies rich in virtue and unmingled.
With due observance of thy godlike seat,
Great Agamemnon, Nestor shall apply
Thy latest words. In the reproof of chance
Lies the true proof of men: the sea being smooth,
How many shallow bauble boats dare sail
Upon her patient breast, making their way
With those of nobler bulk!
But let the ruffian Boreas once enrage
The gentle Thetis, and anon behold
The strong-ribbd bark through liquid mountains cut,
Bounding between the two moist elements,
Like Perseus horse: wheres then the saucy boat
Whose weak untimberd sides but even now
Co-rivalld greatness? Either to harbour fled,
Or made a toast for Neptune. Even so
Doth valours show and valours worth divide
In storms of fortune; for in her ray and brightness
The herd hath more annoyance by the breeze
Than by the tiger; but when the splitting wind
Makes flexible the knees of knotted oaks,
And flies fled under shade, why, then the thing of courage
As roused with rage with rage doth sympathize,
And with an accent tuned in selfsame key
Retorts to chiding fortune.
Agamemnon,
Thou great commander, nerve and bone of Greece,
Heart of our numbers, soul and only spirit.
In whom the tempers and the minds of all
Should be shut up, hear what Ulysses speaks.
Besides the applause and approbation To which,
To AGAMEMNON
most mighty for thy place and sway,
To NESTOR
And thou most reverend for thy stretchd-out life
I give to both your speeches, which were such
As Agamemnon and the hand of Greece
Should hold up high in brass, and such again
As venerable Nestor, hatchd in silver,
Should with a bond of air, strong as the axle-tree
On which heaven rides, knit all the Greekish ears
To his experienced tongue, yet let it please both,
Thou great, and wise, to hear Ulysses speak.
Speak, prince of Ithaca; and bet of less expect
That matter needless, of importless burden,
Divide thy lips, than we are confident,
When rank Thersites opes his mastic jaws,
We shall hear music, wit and oracle.
Troy, yet upon his basis, had been down,
And the great Hectors sword had lackd a master,
But for these instances.
The specialty of rule hath been neglected:
And, look, how many Grecian tents do stand
Hollow upon this plain, so many hollow factions.
When that the general is not like the hive
To whom the foragers shall all repair,
What honey is expected? Degree being vizarded,
The unworthiest shows as fairly in the mask.
The heavens themselves, the planets and this centre
Observe degree, priority and place,
Insisture, course, proportion, season, form,
Office and custom, in all line of order;
And therefore is the glorious planet Sol
In noble eminence enthroned and sphered
Amidst the other; whose medicinable eye
Corrects the ill aspects of planets evil,
And posts, like the commandment of a king,
Sans cheque to good and bad: but when the planets
In evil mixture to disorder wander,
What plagues and what portents! what mutiny!
What raging of the sea! shaking of earth!
Commotion in the winds! frights, changes, horrors,
Divert and crack, rend and deracinate
The unity and married calm of states
Quite from their fixure! O, when degree is shaked,
Which is the ladder to all high designs,
Then enterprise is sick! How could communities,
Degrees in schools and brotherhoods in cities,
Peaceful commerce from dividable shores,
The primogenitive and due of birth,
Prerogative of age, crowns, sceptres, laurels,
But by degree, stand in authentic place?
Take but degree away, untune that string,
And, hark, what discord follows! each thing meets
In mere oppugnancy: the bounded waters
Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores
And make a sop of all this solid globe:
Strength should be lord of imbecility,
And the rude son should strike his father dead:
Force should be right; or rather, right and wrong,
Between whose endless jar justice resides,
Should lose their names, and so should justice too.
Then every thing includes itself in power,
Power into will, will into appetite;
And appetite, an universal wolf,
So doubly seconded with will and power,
Must make perforce an universal prey,
And last eat up himself. Great Agamemnon,
This chaos, when degree is suffocate,
Follows the choking.
And this neglection of degree it is
That by a pace goes backward, with a purpose
It hath to climb. The generals disdaind
By him one step below, he by the next,
That next by him beneath; so every step,
Exampled by the first pace that is sick
Of his superior, grows to an envious fever
Of pale and bloodless emulation:
And tis this fever that keeps Troy on foot,
Not her own sinews. To end a tale of length,
Troy in our weakness stands, not in her strength.
Most wisely hath Ulysses here discoverd
The fever whereof all our power is sick.
The nature of the sickness found, Ulysses,
What is the remedy?
The great Achilles, whom opinion crowns
The sinew and the forehand of our host,
Having his ear full of his airy fame,
Grows dainty of his worth, and in his tent
Lies mocking our designs: with him Patroclus
Upon a lazy bed the livelong day
Breaks scurril jests;
And with ridiculous and awkward action,
Which, slanderer, he imitation calls,
He pageants us. Sometime, great Agamemnon,
Thy topless deputation he puts on,
And, like a strutting player, whose conceit
Lies in his hamstring, and doth think it rich
To hear the wooden dialogue and sound
Twixt his stretchd footing and the scaffoldage,--
Such to-be-pitied and oer-wrested seeming
He acts thy greatness in: and when he speaks,
Tis like a chime a-mending; with terms unsquared,
Which, from the tongue of roaring Typhon droppd
Would seem hyperboles. At this fusty stuff
The large Achilles, on his pressd bed lolling,
From his deep chest laughs out a loud applause;
Cries Excellent! tis Agamemnon just.
Now play me Nestor; hem, and stroke thy beard,
As he being drest to some oration.
Thats done, as near as the extremest ends
Of parallels, as like as Vulcan and his wife:
Yet god Achilles still cries Excellent!
Tis Nestor right. Now play him me, Patroclus,
Arming to answer in a night alarm.
And then, forsooth, the faint defects of age
Must be the scene of mirth; to cough and spit,
And, with a palsy-fumbling on his gorget,
Shake in and out the rivet: and at this sport
Sir Valour dies; cries O, enough, Patroclus;
Or give me ribs of steel! I shall split all
In pleasure of my spleen. And in this fashion,
All our abilities, gifts, natures, shapes,
Severals and generals of grace exact,
Achievements, plots, orders, preventions,
Excitements to the field, or speech for truce,
Success or loss, what is or is not, serves
As stuff for these two to make paradoxes.
And in the imitation of these twain--
Who, as Ulysses says, opinion crowns
With an imperial voice--many are infect.
Ajax is grown self-willd, and bears his head
In such a rein, in full as proud a place
As broad Achilles; keeps his tent like him;
Makes factious feasts; rails on our state of war,
Bold as an oracle, and sets Thersites,
A slave whose gall coins slanders like a mint,
To match us in comparisons with dirt,
To weaken and discredit our exposure,
How rank soever rounded in with danger.
They tax our policy, and call it cowardice,
Count wisdom as no member of the war,
Forestall prescience, and esteem no act
But that of hand: the still and mental parts,
That do contrive how many hands shall strike,
When fitness calls them on, and know by measure
Of their observant toil the enemies weight,--
Why, this hath not a fingers dignity:
They call this bed-work, mappery, closet-war;
So that the ram that batters down the wall,
For the great swing and rudeness of his poise,
They place before his hand that made the engine,
Or those that with the fineness of their souls
By reason guide his execution.
Let this be granted, and Achilles horse
Makes many Thetis sons.
A tucket
What trumpet? look, Menelaus.
From Troy.
Enter AENEAS
What would you fore our tent?
Is this great Agamemnons tent, I pray you?
Even this.
May one, that is a herald and a prince,
Do a fair message to his kingly ears?
With surety stronger than Achilles arm
Fore all the Greekish heads, which with one voice
Call Agamemnon head and general.
Fair leave and large security. How may
A stranger to those most imperial looks
Know them from eyes of other mortals?
How!
Ay;
I ask, that I might waken reverence,
And bid the cheek be ready with a blush
Modest as morning when she coldly eyes
The youthful Phoebus:
Which is that god in office, guiding men?
Which is the high and mighty Agamemnon?
This Trojan scorns us; or the men of Troy
Are ceremonious courtiers.
Courtiers as free, as debonair, unarmd,
As bending angels; thats their fame in peace:
But when they would seem soldiers, they have galls,
Good arms, strong joints, true swords; and,
Joves accord,
Nothing so full of heart. But peace, AEneas,
Peace, Trojan; lay thy finger on thy lips!
The worthiness of praise distains his worth,
If that the praised himself bring the praise forth:
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath fame blows; that praise, sole sure,
transcends.
Sir, you of Troy, call you yourself AEneas?
Ay, Greek, that is my name.
Whats your affair I pray you?
Sir, pardon; tis for Agamemnons ears.
He hears naught privately that comes from Troy.
Nor I from Troy come not to whisper him:
I bring a trumpet to awake his ear,
To set his sense on the attentive bent,
And then to speak.
Speak frankly as the wind;
It is not Agamemnons sleeping hour:
That thou shalt know. Trojan, he is awake,
He tells thee so himself.
Trumpet, blow loud,
Send thy brass voice through all these lazy tents;
And every Greek of mettle, let him know,
What Troy means fairly shall be spoke aloud.
Trumpet sounds
We have, great Agamemnon, here in Troy
A prince calld Hector,--Priam is his father,--
Who in this dull and long-continued truce
Is rusty grown: he bade me take a trumpet,
And to this purpose speak. Kings, princes, lords!
If there be one among the fairst of Greece
That holds his honour higher than his ease,
That seeks his praise more than he fears his peril,
That knows his valour, and knows not his fear,
That loves his mistress more than in confession,
With truant vows to her own lips he loves,
And dare avow her beauty and her worth
In other arms than hers,--to him this challenge.
Hector, in view of Trojans and of Greeks,
Shall make it good, or do his best to do it,
He hath a lady, wiser, fairer, truer,
Than ever Greek did compass in his arms,
And will to-morrow with his trumpet call
Midway between your tents and walls of Troy,
To rouse a Grecian that is true in love:
If any come, Hector shall honour him;
If none, hell say in Troy when he retires,
The Grecian dames are sunburnt and not worth
The splinter of a lance. Even so much.
This shall be told our lovers, Lord AEneas;
If none of them have soul in such a kind,
We left them all at home: but we are soldiers;
And may that soldier a mere recreant prove,
That means not, hath not, or is not in love!
If then one is, or hath, or means to be,
That one meets Hector; if none else, I am he.
Tell him of Nestor, one that was a man
When Hectors grandsire suckd: he is old now;
But if there be not in our Grecian host
One noble man that hath one spark of fire,
To answer for his love, tell him from me
Ill hide my silver beard in a gold beaver
And in my vantbrace put this witherd brawn,
And meeting him will tell him that my lady
Was fairer than his grandam and as chaste
As may be in the world: his youth in flood,
Ill prove this truth with my three drops of blood.
Now heavens forbid such scarcity of youth!
Amen.
Fair Lord AEneas, let me touch your hand;
To our pavilion shall I lead you, sir.
Achilles shall have word of this intent;
So shall each lord of Greece, from tent to tent:
Yourself shall feast with us before you go
And find the welcome of a noble foe.
Exeunt all but ULYSSES and NESTOR
Nestor!
What says Ulysses?
I have a young conception in my brain;
Be you my time to bring it to some shape.
What ist?
This tis:
Blunt wedges rive hard knots: the seeded pride
That hath to this maturity blown up
In rank Achilles must or now be croppd,
Or, shedding, breed a nursery of like evil,
To overbulk us all.
Well, and how?
This challenge that the gallant Hector sends,
However it is spread in general name,
Relates in purpose only to Achilles.
The purpose is perspicuous even as substance,
Whose grossness little characters sum up:
And, in the publication, make no strain,
But that Achilles, were his brain as barren
As banks of Libya,--though, Apollo knows,
Tis dry enough,--will, with great speed of judgment,
Ay, with celerity, find Hectors purpose
Pointing on him.
And wake him to the answer, think you?
Yes, tis most meet: whom may you else oppose,
That can from Hector bring his honour off,
If not Achilles? Thought be a sportful combat,
Yet in the trial much opinion dwells;
For here the Trojans taste our dearst repute
With their finest palate: and trust to me, Ulysses,
Our imputation shall be oddly poised
In this wild action; for the success,
Although particular, shall give a scantling
Of good or bad unto the general;
