And in such indexes, although small pricks
To their subsequent volumes, there is seen
The baby figure of the giant mass
Of things to come at large. It is supposed
He that meets Hector issues from our choice
And choice, being mutual act of all our souls,
Makes merit her election, and doth boil,
As twere from us all, a man distilld
Out of our virtues; who miscarrying,
What heart receives from hence the conquering part,
To steel a strong opinion to themselves?
Which entertaind, limbs are his instruments,
In no less working than are swords and bows
Directive by the limbs.
Give pardon to my speech:
Therefore tis meet Achilles meet not Hector.
Let us, like merchants, show our foulest wares,
And think, perchance, theyll sell; if not,
The lustre of the better yet to show,
Shall show the better. Do not consent
That ever Hector and Achilles meet;
For both our honour and our shame in this
Are doggd with two strange followers.
I see them not with my old eyes: what are they?
What glory our Achilles shares from Hector,
Were he not proud, we all should share with him:
But he already is too insolent;
A nd we were better parch in Afric sun
Than in the pride and salt scorn of his eyes,
Should he scape Hector fair: if he were foild,
Why then, we did our main opinion crush
In taint of our best man. No, make a lottery;
And, by device, let blockish Ajax draw
The sort to fight with Hector: among ourselves
Give him allowance for the better man;
For that will physic the great Myrmidon
Who broils in loud applause, and make him fall
His crest that prouder than blue Iris bends.
If the dull brainless Ajax come safe off,
Well dress him up in voices: if he fail,
Yet go we under our opinion still
That we have better men. But, hit or miss,
Our projects life this shape of sense assumes:
Ajax employd plucks down Achilles plumes.
Ulysses,
Now I begin to relish thy advice;
And I will give a taste of it forthwith
To Agamemnon: go we to him straight.
Two curs shall tame each other: pride alone
Must tarre the mastiffs on, as twere their bone.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. A part of the Grecian camp.
Enter AJAX and THERSITES
Thersites!
Agamemnon, how if he had boils? full, all over,
generally?
Thersites!
And those boils did run? say so: did not the
general run then? were not that a botchy core?
Dog!
Then would come some matter from him; I see none now.
Thou bitch-wolfs son, canst thou not hear?
Beating him
Feel, then.
The plague of Greece upon thee, thou mongrel
beef-witted lord!
Speak then, thou vinewedst leaven, speak: I will
beat thee into handsomeness.
I shall sooner rail thee into wit and holiness: but,
I think, thy horse will sooner con an oration than
thou learn a prayer without book. Thou canst strike,
canst thou? a red murrain o thy jades tricks!
Toadstool, learn me the proclamation.
Dost thou think I have no sense, thou strikest me thus?
The proclamation!
Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think.
Do not, porpentine, do not: my fingers itch.
I would thou didst itch from head to foot and I had
the scratching of thee; I would make thee the
loathsomest scab in Greece. When thou art forth in
the incursions, thou strikest as slow as another.
I say, the proclamation!
Thou grumblest and railest every hour on Achilles,
and thou art as full of envy at his greatness as
Cerberus is at Proserpines beauty, ay, that thou
barkest at him.
Mistress Thersites!
Thou shouldest strike him.
Cobloaf!
He would pun thee into shivers with his fist, as a
sailor breaks a biscuit.
[Beating him]  You whoreson cur!
Do, do.
Thou stool for a witch!
Ay, do, do; thou sodden-witted lord! thou hast no
more brain than I have in mine elbows; an assinego
may tutor thee: thou scurvy-valiant ass! thou art
here but to thrash Trojans; and thou art bought and
sold among those of any wit, like a barbarian slave.
If thou use to beat me, I will begin at thy heel, and
tell what thou art by inches, thou thing of no
bowels, thou!
You dog!
You scurvy lord!
[Beating him]  You cur!
Mars his idiot! do, rudeness; do, camel; do, do.
Enter ACHILLES and PATROCLUS
Why, how now, Ajax! wherefore do you thus? How now,
Thersites! whats the matter, man?
You see him there, do you?
Ay; whats the matter?
Nay, look upon him.
So I do: whats the matter?
Nay, but regard him well.
Well! why, I do so.
But yet you look not well upon him; for whosoever you
take him to be, he is Ajax.
I know that, fool.
Ay, but that fool knows not himself.
Therefore I beat thee.
Lo, lo, lo, lo, what modicums of wit he utters! his
evasions have ears thus long. I have bobbed his
brain more than he has beat my bones: I will buy
nine sparrows for a penny, and his pia mater is not
worth the nineth part of a sparrow. This lord,
Achilles, Ajax, who wears his wit in his belly and
his guts in his head, Ill tell you what I say of
him.
What?
I say, this Ajax--
Ajax offers to beat him
Nay, good Ajax.
Has not so much wit--
Nay, I must hold you.
As will stop the eye of Helens needle, for whom he
comes to fight.
Peace, fool!
I would have peace and quietness, but the fool will
not: he there: that he: look you there.
O thou damned cur! I shall--
Will you set your wit to a fools?
No, I warrant you; for a fools will shame it.
Good words, Thersites.
Whats the quarrel?
I bade the vile owl go learn me the tenor of the
proclamation, and he rails upon me.
I serve thee not.
Well, go to, go to.
I serve here voluntarily.
Your last service was sufferance, twas not
voluntary: no man is beaten voluntary: Ajax was
here the voluntary, and you as under an impress.
Een so; a great deal of your wit, too, lies in your
sinews, or else there be liars. Hector have a great
catch, if he knock out either of your brains: a
were as good crack a fusty nut with no kernel.
What, with me too, Thersites?
Theres Ulysses and old Nestor, whose wit was mouldy
ere your grandsires had nails on their toes, yoke you
like draught-oxen and make you plough up the wars.
What, what?
Yes, good sooth: to, Achilles! to, Ajax! to!
I shall cut out your tongue.
Tis no matter! I shall speak as much as thou
afterwards.
No more words, Thersites; peace!
I will hold my peace when Achilles brach bids me, shall I?
Theres for you, Patroclus.
I will see you hanged, like clotpoles, ere I come
any more to your tents: I will keep where there is
wit stirring and leave the faction of fools.
Exit
A good riddance.
Marry, this, sir, is proclaimd through all our host:
That Hector, by the fifth hour of the sun,
Will with a trumpet twixt our tents and Troy
To-morrow morning call some knight to arms
That hath a stomach; and such a one that dare
Maintain--I know not what: tis trash. Farewell.
Farewell. Who shall answer him?
I know not: tis put to lottery; otherwise
He knew his man.
O, meaning you. I will go learn more of it.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Troy. A room in Priams palace.
Enter PRIAM, HECTOR, TROILUS, PARIS, and HELENUS
After so many hours, lives, speeches spent,
Thus once again says Nestor from the Greeks:
Deliver Helen, and all damage else--
As honour, loss of time, travail, expense,
Wounds, friends, and what else dear that is consumed
In hot digestion of this cormorant war--
Shall be struck off. Hector, what say you tot?
Though no man lesser fears the Greeks than I
As far as toucheth my particular,
Yet, dread Priam,
There is no lady of more softer bowels,
More spongy to suck in the sense of fear,
More ready to cry out Who knows what follows?
Than Hector is: the wound of peace is surety,
Surety secure; but modest doubt is calld
The beacon of the wise, the tent that searches
To the bottom of the worst. Let Helen go:
Since the first sword was drawn about this question,
Every tithe soul, mongst many thousand dismes,
Hath been as dear as Helen; I mean, of ours:
If we have lost so many tenths of ours,
To guard a thing not ours nor worth to us,
Had it our name, the value of one ten,
What merits in that reason which denies
The yielding of her up?
Fie, fie, my brother!
Weigh you the worth and honour of a king
So great as our dread father in a scale
Of common ounces? will you with counters sum
The past proportion of his infinite?
And buckle in a waist most fathomless
With spans and inches so diminutive
As fears and reasons? fie, for godly shame!
No marvel, though you bite so sharp at reasons,
You are so empty of them. Should not our father
Bear the great sway of his affairs with reasons,
Because your speech hath none that tells him so?
You are for dreams and slumbers, brother priest;
You fur your gloves with reason. Here are
your reasons:
You know an enemy intends you harm;
You know a sword employd is perilous,
And reason flies the object of all harm:
Who marvels then, when Helenus beholds
A Grecian and his sword, if he do set
The very wings of reason to his heels
And fly like chidden Mercury from Jove,
Or like a star disorbd? Nay, if we talk of reason,
Lets shut our gates and sleep: manhood and honour
Should have hare-hearts, would they but fat
their thoughts
With this crammd reason: reason and respect
Make livers pale and lustihood deject.
Brother, she is not worth what she doth cost
The holding.
What is aught, but as tis valued?
But value dwells not in particular will;
It holds his estimate and dignity
As well wherein tis precious of itself
As in the prizer: tis mad idolatry
To make the service greater than the god
And the will dotes that is attributive
To what infectiously itself affects,
Without some image of the affected merit.
I take to-day a wife, and my election
Is led on in the conduct of my will;
My will enkindled by mine eyes and ears,
Two traded pilots twixt the dangerous shores
Of will and judgment: how may I avoid,
Although my will distaste what it elected,
The wife I chose? there can be no evasion
To blench from this and to stand firm by honour:
We turn not back the silks upon the merchant,
When we have soild them, nor the remainder viands
We do not throw in unrespective sieve,
Because we now are full. It was thought meet
Paris should do some vengeance on the Greeks:
Your breath of full consent bellied his sails;
The seas and winds, old wranglers, took a truce
And did him service: he touchd the ports desired,
And for an old aunt whom the Greeks held captive,
He brought a Grecian queen, whose youth and freshness
Wrinkles Apollos, and makes stale the morning.
Why keep we her? the Grecians keep our aunt:
Is she worth keeping? why, she is a pearl,
Whose price hath launchd above a thousand ships,
And turnd crownd kings to merchants.
If youll avouch twas wisdom Paris went--
As you must needs, for you all cried Go, go,--
If youll confess he brought home noble prize--
As you must needs, for you all clappd your hands
And cried Inestimable!--why do you now
The issue of your proper wisdoms rate,
And do a deed that fortune never did,
Beggar the estimation which you prized
Richer than sea and land? O, theft most base,
That we have stoln what we do fear to keep!
But, thieves, unworthy of a thing so stoln,
That in their country did them that disgrace,
We fear to warrant in our native place!
[Within]  Cry, Trojans, cry!
What noise? what shriek is this?
Tis our mad sister, I do know her voice.
[Within]  Cry, Trojans!
It is Cassandra.
Enter CASSANDRA, raving
Cry, Trojans, cry! lend me ten thousand eyes,
And I will fill them with prophetic tears.
Peace, sister, peace!
Virgins and boys, mid-age and wrinkled eld,
Soft infancy, that nothing canst but cry,
Add to my clamours! let us pay betimes
A moiety of that mass of moan to come.
Cry, Trojans, cry! practise your eyes with tears!
Troy must not be, nor goodly Ilion stand;
Our firebrand brother, Paris, burns us all.
Cry, Trojans, cry! a Helen and a woe:
Cry, cry! Troy burns, or else let Helen go.
Exit
Now, youthful Troilus, do not these high strains
Of divination in our sister work
Some touches of remorse? or is your blood
So madly hot that no discourse of reason,
Nor fear of bad success in a bad cause,
Can qualify the same?
Why, brother Hector,
We may not think the justness of each act
Such and no other than event doth form it,
Nor once deject the courage of our minds,
Because Cassandras mad: her brain-sick raptures
Cannot distaste the goodness of a quarrel
Which hath our several honours all engaged
To make it gracious. For my private part,
I am no more touchd than all Priams sons:
And Jove forbid there should be done amongst us
Such things as might offend the weakest spleen
To fight for and maintain!
Else might the world convince of levity
As well my undertakings as your counsels:
But I attest the gods, your full consent
Gave wings to my propension and cut off
All fears attending on so dire a project.
For what, alas, can these my single arms?
What Propugnation is in one mans valour,
To stand the push and enmity of those
This quarrel would excite? Yet, I protest,
Were I alone to pass the difficulties
And had as ample power as I have will,
Paris should neer retract what he hath done,
Nor faint in the pursuit.
Paris, you speak
Like one besotted on your sweet delights:
You have the honey still, but these the gall;
So to be valiant is no praise at all.
Sir, I propose not merely to myself
The pleasures such a beauty brings with it;
But I would have the soil of her fair rape
Wiped off, in honourable keeping her.
What treason were it to the ransackd queen,
Disgrace to your great worths and shame to me,
Now to deliver her possession up
On terms of base compulsion! Can it be
That so degenerate a strain as this
Should once set footing in your generous bosoms?
Theres not the meanest spirit on our party
Without a heart to dare or sword to draw
When Helen is defended, nor none so noble
Whose life were ill bestowd or death unfamed
Where Helen is the subject; then, I say,
Well may we fight for her whom, we know well,
The worlds large spaces cannot parallel.
Paris and Troilus, you have both said well,
And on the cause and question now in hand
Have glozed, but superficially: not much
Unlike young men, whom Aristotle thought
Unfit to hear moral philosophy:
The reasons you allege do more conduce
To the hot passion of distemperd blood
Than to make up a free determination
Twixt right and wrong, for pleasure and revenge
Have ears more deaf than adders to the voice
Of any true decision. Nature craves
All dues be renderd to their owners: now,
What nearer debt in all humanity
Than wife is to the husband? If this law
Of nature be corrupted through affection,
And that great minds, of partial indulgence
To their benumbed wills, resist the same,
There is a law in each well-orderd nation
To curb those raging appetites that are
Most disobedient and refractory.
If Helen then be wife to Spartas king,
As it is known she is, these moral laws
Of nature and of nations speak aloud
To have her back returnd: thus to persist
In doing wrong extenuates not wrong,
But makes it much more heavy. Hectors opinion
Is this in way of truth; yet neertheless,
My spritely brethren, I propend to you
In resolution to keep Helen still,
For tis a cause that hath no mean dependance
Upon our joint and several dignities.
Why, there you touchd the life of our design:
Were it not glory that we more affected
Than the performance of our heaving spleens,
I would not wish a drop of Trojan blood
Spent more in her defence. But, worthy Hector,
She is a theme of honour and renown,
A spur to valiant and magnanimous deeds,
Whose present courage may beat down our foes,
And fame in time to come canonize us;
For, I presume, brave Hector would not lose
So rich advantage of a promised glory
As smiles upon the forehead of this action
For the wide worlds revenue.
I am yours,
You valiant offspring of great Priamus.
I have a roisting challenge sent amongst
The dun and factious nobles of the Greeks
Will strike amazement to their drowsy spirits:
I was advertised their great general slept,
Whilst emulation in the army crept:
This, I presume, will wake him.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The Grecian camp. Before Achilles tent.
Enter THERSITES, solus
How now, Thersites! what lost in the labyrinth of
thy fury! Shall the elephant Ajax carry it thus? He
beats me, and I rail at him: O, worthy satisfaction!
would it were otherwise; that I could beat him,
whilst he railed at me. Sfoot, Ill learn to
conjure and raise devils, but Ill see some issue of
my spiteful execrations. Then theres Achilles, a
rare enginer! If Troy be not taken till these two
undermine it, the walls will stand till they fall of
themselves. O thou great thunder-darter of Olympus,
forget that thou art Jove, the king of gods and,
Mercury, lose all the serpentine craft of thy
caduceus, if ye take not that little, little less
than little wit from them that they have! which
short-armed ignorance itself knows is so abundant
scarce, it will not in circumvention deliver a fly
from a spider, without drawing their massy irons and
cutting the web. After this, the vengeance on the
whole camp! or rather, the bone-ache! for that,
methinks, is the curse dependent on those that war
for a placket. I have said my prayers and devil Envy
say Amen. What ho! my Lord Achilles!
Enter PATROCLUS
Whos there? Thersites! Good Thersites, come in and rail.
If I could have remembered a gilt counterfeit, thou
wouldst not have slipped out of my contemplation: but
it is no matter; thyself upon thyself! The common
curse of mankind, folly and ignorance, be thine in
great revenue! heaven bless thee from a tutor, and
discipline come not near thee! Let thy blood be thy
direction till thy death! then if she that lays thee
out says thou art a fair corse, Ill be sworn and
sworn upont she never shrouded any but lazars.
Amen. Wheres Achilles?
What, art thou devout? wast thou in prayer?
Ay: the heavens hear me!
Enter ACHILLES
Whos there?
Thersites, my lord.
Where, where? Art thou come? why, my cheese, my
digestion, why hast thou not served thyself in to
my table so many meals? Come, whats Agamemnon?
Thy commander, Achilles. Then tell me, Patroclus,
whats Achilles?
Thy lord, Thersites: then tell me, I pray thee,
whats thyself?
Thy knower, Patroclus: then tell me, Patroclus,
what art thou?
Thou mayst tell that knowest.
O, tell, tell.
Ill decline the whole question. Agamemnon commands
Achilles; Achilles is my lord; I am Patroclus
knower, and Patroclus is a fool.
You rascal!
Peace, fool! I have not done.
He is a privileged man. Proceed, Thersites.
Agamemnon is a fool; Achilles is a fool; Thersites
is a fool, and, as aforesaid, Patroclus is a fool.
Derive this; come.
Agamemnon is a fool to offer to command Achilles;
Achilles is a fool to be commanded of Agamemnon;
Thersites is a fool to serve such a fool, and
Patroclus is a fool positive.
Why am I a fool?
Make that demand of the prover. It suffices me thou
art. Look you, who comes here?
Patroclus, Ill speak with nobody.
Come in with me, Thersites.
Exit
Here is such patchery, such juggling and such
knavery! all the argument is a cuckold and a
whore; a good quarrel to draw emulous factions
and bleed to death upon. Now, the dry serpigo on
the subject! and war and lechery confound all!
Exit
Enter AGAMEMNON, ULYSSES, NESTOR, DIOMEDES, and AJAX
Where is Achilles?
Within his tent; but ill disposed, my lord.
Let it be known to him that we are here.
He shent our messengers; and we lay by
Our appertainments, visiting of him:
Let him be told so; lest perchance he think
We dare not move the question of our place,
Or know not what we are.
I shall say so to him.
Exit
We saw him at the opening of his tent:
He is not sick.
Yes, lion-sick, sick of proud heart: you may call it
melancholy, if you will favour the man; but, by my
head, tis pride: but why, why? let him show us the
cause. A word, my lord.
Takes AGAMEMNON aside
What moves Ajax thus to bay at him?
Achilles hath inveigled his fool from him.
Who, Thersites?
He.
Then will Ajax lack matter, if he have lost his argument.
No, you see, he is his argument that has his
argument, Achilles.
All the better; their fraction is more our wish than
their faction: but it was a strong composure a fool
could disunite.
The amity that wisdom knits not, folly may easily
untie. Here comes Patroclus.
Re-enter PATROCLUS
No Achilles with him.
The elephant hath joints, but none for courtesy:
his legs are legs for necessity, not for flexure.
Achilles bids me say, he is much sorry,
If any thing more than your sport and pleasure
Did move your greatness and this noble state
To call upon him; he hopes it is no other
But for your health and your digestion sake,
And after-dinners breath.
Hear you, Patroclus:
We are too well acquainted with these answers:
But his evasion, wingd thus swift with scorn,
Cannot outfly our apprehensions.
Much attribute he hath, and much the reason
Why we ascribe it to him; yet all his virtues,
Not virtuously on his own part beheld,
Do in our eyes begin to lose their gloss,
Yea, like fair fruit in an unwholesome dish,
Are like to rot untasted. Go and tell him,
We come to speak with him; and you shall not sin,
If you do say we think him over-proud
And under-honest, in self-assumption greater
Than in the note of judgment; and worthier
than himself
Here tend the savage strangeness he puts on,
Disguise the holy strength of their command,
And underwrite in an observing kind
His humorous predominance; yea, watch
His pettish lunes, his ebbs, his flows, as if
The passage and whole carriage of this action
Rode on his tide. Go tell him this, and add,
That if he overhold his price so much,
Well none of him; but let him, like an engine
Not portable, lie under this report:
Bring action hither, this cannot go to war:
A stirring dwarf we do allowance give
Before a sleeping giant. Tell him so.
I shall; and bring his answer presently.
Exit
In second voice well not be satisfied;
We come to speak with him. Ulysses, enter you.
Exit ULYSSES
What is he more than another?
No more than what he thinks he is.
Is he so much? Do you not think he thinks himself a
better man than I am?
No question.
Will you subscribe his thought, and say he is?
No, noble Ajax; you are as strong, as valiant, as
wise, no less noble, much more gentle, and altogether
more tractable.
Why should a man be proud? How doth pride grow? I
know not what pride is.
Your mind is the clearer, Ajax, and your virtues the
fairer. He that is proud eats up himself: pride is
his own glass, his own trumpet, his own chronicle;
and whatever praises itself but in the deed, devours
the deed in the praise.
I do hate a proud man, as I hate the engendering of toads.
Yet he loves himself: ist not strange?
Aside
Re-enter ULYSSES
Achilles will not to the field to-morrow.
Whats his excuse?
He doth rely on none,
But carries on the stream of his dispose
Without observance or respect of any,
In will peculiar and in self-admission.
Why will he not upon our fair request
Untent his person and share the air with us?
Things small as nothing, for requests sake only,
He makes important: possessd he is with greatness,
And speaks not to himself but with a pride
That quarrels at self-breath: imagined worth
Holds in his blood such swoln and hot discourse
That twixt his mental and his active parts
Kingdomd Achilles in commotion rages
And batters down himself: what should I say?
He is so plaguy proud that the death-tokens of it
Cry No recovery.
Let Ajax go to him.
Dear lord, go you and greet him in his tent:
Tis said he holds you well, and will be led
At your request a little from himself.
O Agamemnon, let it not be so!
Well consecrate the steps that Ajax makes
When they go from Achilles: shall the proud lord
That bastes his arrogance with his own seam
And never suffers matter of the world
Enter his thoughts, save such as do revolve
And ruminate himself, shall he be worshippd
Of that we hold an idol more than he?
No, this thrice worthy and right valiant lord
Must not so stale his palm, nobly acquired;
Nor, by my will, assubjugate his merit,
As amply titled as Achilles is,
By going to Achilles:
That were to enlard his fat already pride
And add more coals to Cancer when he burns
With entertaining great Hyperion.
This lord go to him! Jupiter forbid,
And say in thunder Achilles go to him.
[Aside to DIOMEDES]  O, this is well; he rubs the
vein of him.
[Aside to NESTOR]  And how his silence drinks up
this applause!
If I go to him, with my armed fist Ill pash him oer the face.
O, no, you shall not go.
An a be proud with me, Ill pheeze his pride:
Let me go to him.
Not for the worth that hangs upon our quarrel.
A paltry, insolent fellow!
How he describes himself!
Can he not be sociable?
The raven chides blackness.
Ill let his humours blood.
He will be the physician that should be the patient.
An all men were o my mind,--
Wit would be out of fashion.
A should not bear it so, a should eat swords first:
shall pride carry it?
An twould, yould carry half.
A would have ten shares.
I will knead him; Ill make him supple.
Hes not yet through warm: force him with praises:
pour in, pour in; his ambition is dry.
[To AGAMEMNON]  My lord, you feed too much on this dislike.
Our noble general, do not do so.
You must prepare to fight without Achilles.
Why, tis this naming of him does him harm.
Here is a man--but tis before his face;
I will be silent.
Wherefore should you so?
He is not emulous, as Achilles is.
Know the whole world, he is as valiant.
A whoreson dog, that shall pelter thus with us!
Would he were a Trojan!
What a vice were it in Ajax now,--
If he were proud,--
Or covetous of praise,--
Ay, or surly borne,--
Or strange, or self-affected!
Thank the heavens, lord, thou art of sweet composure;
Praise him that got thee, she that gave thee suck:
Famed be thy tutor, and thy parts of nature
Thrice famed, beyond all erudition:
But he that disciplined thy arms to fight,
Let Mars divide eternity in twain,
And give him half: and, for thy vigour,
Bull-bearing Milo his addition yield
To sinewy Ajax. I will not praise thy wisdom,
Which, like a bourn, a pale, a shore, confines
Thy spacious and dilated parts: heres Nestor;
Instructed by the antiquary times,
He must, he is, he cannot but be wise:
Put pardon, father Nestor, were your days
As green as Ajax and your brain so temperd,
You should not have the eminence of him,
But be as Ajax.
Shall I call you father?
Ay, my good son.
Be ruled by him, Lord Ajax.
There is no tarrying here; the hart Achilles
Keeps thicket. Please it our great general
To call together all his state of war;
Fresh kings are come to Troy: to-morrow
We must with all our main of power stand fast:
And heres a lord,--come knights from east to west,
And cull their flower, Ajax shall cope the best.
Go we to council. Let Achilles sleep:
Light boats sail swift, though greater hulks draw deep.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. Troy. Priams palace.
Enter a Servant and PANDARUS
Friend, you! pray you, a word: do not you follow
the young Lord Paris?
Ay, sir, when he goes before me.
You depend upon him, I mean?
Sir, I do depend upon the lord.
You depend upon a noble gentleman; I must needs
praise him.
The lord be praised!
You know me, do you not?
Faith, sir, superficially.
Friend, know me better; I am the Lord Pandarus.
I hope I shall know your honour better.
I do desire it.
You are in the state of grace.
Grace! not so, friend: honour and lordship are my titles.
Music within
What music is this?
I do but partly know, sir: it is music in parts.
Know you the musicians?
Wholly, sir.
Who play they to?
To the hearers, sir.
At whose pleasure, friend
At mine, sir, and theirs that love music.
Command, I mean, friend.
Who shall I command, sir?
Friend, we understand not one another: I am too
courtly and thou art too cunning. At whose request
do these men play?
Thats to t indeed, sir: marry, sir, at the request
of Paris my lord, whos there in person; with him,
the mortal Venus, the heart-blood of beauty, loves
invisible soul,--
Who, my cousin Cressida?
No, sir, Helen: could you not find out that by her
attributes?
It should seem, fellow, that thou hast not seen the
Lady Cressida. I come to speak with Paris from the
Prince Troilus: I will make a complimental assault
upon him, for my business seethes.
Sodden business! theres a stewed phrase indeed!
Enter PARIS and HELEN, attended
Fair be to you, my lord, and to all this fair
company! fair desires, in all fair measure,
fairly guide them! especially to you, fair queen!
fair thoughts be your fair pillow!
Dear lord, you are full of fair words.
You speak your fair pleasure, sweet queen. Fair
prince, here is good broken music.
You have broke it, cousin: and, by my life, you
shall make it whole again; you shall piece it out
with a piece of your performance. Nell, he is full
of harmony.
Truly, lady, no.
O, sir,--
Rude, in sooth; in good sooth, very rude.
Well said, my lord! well, you say so in fits.
I have business to my lord, dear queen. My lord,
will you vouchsafe me a word?
Nay, this shall not hedge us out: well hear you
sing, certainly.
Well, sweet queen. you are pleasant with me. But,
marry, thus, my lord: my dear lord and most esteemed
friend, your brother Troilus,--
My Lord Pandarus; honey-sweet lord,--
Go to, sweet queen, to go:--commends himself most
affectionately to you,--
You shall not bob us out of our melody: if you do,
our melancholy upon your head!
Sweet queen, sweet queen! thats a sweet queen, i faith.
And to make a sweet lady sad is a sour offence.
Nay, that shall not serve your turn; that shall not,
in truth, la. Nay, I care not for such words; no,
no. And, my lord, he desires you, that if the king
call for him at supper, you will make his excuse.
My Lord Pandarus,--
What says my sweet queen, my very very sweet queen?
What exploits in hand? where sups he to-night?
Nay, but, my lord,--
What says my sweet queen? My cousin will fall out
with you. You must not know where he sups.
Ill lay my life, with my disposer Cressida.
No, no, no such matter; you are wide: come, your
disposer is sick.
Well, Ill make excuse.
Ay, good my lord. Why should you say Cressida? no,
your poor disposers sick.
I spy.
You spy! what do you spy? Come, give me an
instrument. Now, sweet queen.
Why, this is kindly done.
My niece is horribly in love with a thing you have,
sweet queen.
She shall have it, my lord, if it be not my lord Paris.
He! no, shell none of him; they two are twain.
Falling in, after falling out, may make them three.
Come, come, Ill hear no more of this; Ill sing
you a song now.
Ay, ay, prithee now. By my troth, sweet lord, thou
hast a fine forehead.
Ay, you may, you may.
Let thy song be love: this love will undo us all.
O Cupid, Cupid, Cupid!
Love! ay, that it shall, i faith.
Ay, good now, love, love, nothing but love.
In good troth, it begins so.
Sings
Love, love, nothing but love, still more!
For, O, loves bow
Shoots buck and doe:
The shaft confounds,
Not that it wounds,
But tickles still the sore.
These lovers cry Oh! oh! they die!
Yet that which seems the wound to kill,
Doth turn oh! oh! to ha! ha! he!
So dying love lives still:
Oh! oh! a while, but ha! ha! ha!
Oh! oh! groans out for ha! ha! ha!
Heigh-ho!
In love, i faith, to the very tip of the nose.
He eats nothing but doves, love, and that breeds hot
blood, and hot blood begets hot thoughts, and hot
thoughts beget hot deeds, and hot deeds is love.
Is this the generation of love? hot blood, hot
thoughts, and hot deeds? Why, they are vipers:
is love a generation of vipers? Sweet lord, whos
a-field to-day?
Hector, Deiphobus, Helenus, Antenor, and all the
gallantry of Troy: I  would fain have armed to-day,
but my Nell would not have it so. How chance my
brother Troilus went not?
He hangs the lip at something: you know all, Lord Pandarus.
Not I, honey-sweet queen. I long to hear how they
sped to-day. Youll remember your brothers excuse?
To a hair.
Farewell, sweet queen.
Commend me to your niece.
I will, sweet queen.
Exit
A retreat sounded
Theyre come from field: let us to Priams hall,
To greet the warriors. Sweet Helen, I must woo you
To help unarm our Hector: his stubborn buckles,
With these your white enchanting fingers touchd,
Shall more obey than to the edge of steel
Or force of Greekish sinews; you shall do more
Than all the island kings,--disarm great Hector.
Twill make us proud to be his servant, Paris;
Yea, what he shall receive of us in duty
Gives us more palm in beauty than we have,
Yea, overshines ourself.
Sweet, above thought I love thee.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. Pandarus orchard.
Enter PANDARUS and Troiluss Boy, meeting
How now! wheres thy master? at my cousin
Cressidas?
No, sir; he stays for you to conduct him thither.
O, here he comes.
Enter TROILUS
How now, how now!
Sirrah, walk off.
Exit Boy
Have you seen my cousin?
No, Pandarus: I stalk about her door,
Like a strange soul upon the Stygian banks
Staying for waftage. O, be thou my Charon,
And give me swift transportance to those fields
Where I may wallow in the lily-beds
Proposed for the deserver! O gentle Pandarus,
From Cupids shoulder pluck his painted wings
And fly with me to Cressid!
Walk here i the orchard, Ill bring her straight.
Exit
I am giddy; expectation whirls me round.
The imaginary relish is so sweet
That it enchants my sense: what will it be,
When that the watery palate tastes indeed
Loves thrice repured nectar? death, I fear me,
Swooning destruction, or some joy too fine,
Too subtle-potent, tuned too sharp in sweetness,
For the capacity of my ruder powers:
I fear it much; and I do fear besides,
That I shall lose distinction in my joys;
As doth a battle, when they charge on heaps
The enemy flying.
Re-enter PANDARUS
Shes making her ready, shell come straight: you
must be witty now. She does so blush, and fetches
her wind so short, as if she were frayed with a
sprite: Ill fetch her. It is the prettiest
villain: she fetches her breath as short as a
new-taen sparrow.
Exit
Even such a passion doth embrace my bosom:
My heart beats thicker than a feverous pulse;
And all my powers do their bestowing lose,
Like vassalage at unawares encountering
The eye of majesty.
Re-enter PANDARUS with CRESSIDA
Come, come, what need you blush? shames a baby.
Here she is now: swear the oaths now to her that
you have sworn to me. What, are you gone again?
you must be watched ere you be made tame, must you?
Come your ways, come your ways; an you draw backward,
well put you i the fills. Why do you not speak to
her? Come, draw this curtain, and lets see your
picture. Alas the day, how loath you are to offend
daylight! an twere dark, yould close sooner.
So, so; rub on, and kiss the mistress. How now!
a kiss in fee-farm! build there, carpenter; the air
is sweet. Nay, you shall fight your hearts out ere
I part you. The falcon as the tercel, for all the
ducks i the river: go to, go to.
You have bereft me of all words, lady.
Words pay no debts, give her deeds: but shell
bereave you o the deeds too, if she call your
activity in question. What, billing again? Heres
In witness whereof the parties interchangeably--
Come in, come in: Ill go get a fire.
Exit
Will you walk in, my lord?
O Cressida, how often have I wished me thus!
Wished, my lord! The gods grant,--O my lord!
What should they grant? what makes this pretty
abruption? What too curious dreg espies my sweet
lady in the fountain of our love?
More dregs than water, if my fears have eyes.
Fears make devils of cherubims; they never see truly.
Blind fear, that seeing reason leads, finds safer
footing than blind reason stumbling without fear: to
fear the worst oft cures the worse.
O, let my lady apprehend no fear: in all Cupids
pageant there is presented no monster.
Nor nothing monstrous neither?
Nothing, but our undertakings; when we vow to weep
seas, live in fire, eat rocks, tame tigers; thinking
it harder for our mistress to devise imposition
enough than for us to undergo any difficulty imposed.
This is the monstruosity in love, lady, that the will
is infinite and the execution confined, that the
desire is boundless and the act a slave to limit.
They say all lovers swear more performance than they
are able and yet reserve an ability that they never
perform, vowing more than the perfection of ten and
discharging less than the tenth part of one. They
that have the voice of lions and the act of hares,
are they not monsters?
Are there such? such are not we: praise us as we
are tasted, allow us as we prove; our head shall go
bare till merit crown it: no perfection in reversion
shall have a praise in present: we will not name
desert before his birth, and, being born, his addition
shall be humble. Few words to fair faith: Troilus
shall be such to Cressid as what envy can say worst
shall be a mock for his truth, and what truth can
speak truest not truer than Troilus.
Will you walk in, my lord?
Re-enter PANDARUS
What, blushing still? have you not done talking yet?
Well, uncle, what folly I commit, I dedicate to you.
I thank you for that: if my lord get a boy of you,
youll give him me. Be true to my lord: if he
flinch, chide me for it.
You know now your hostages; your uncles word and my
firm faith.
Nay, Ill give my word for her too: our kindred,
though they be long ere they are wooed, they are
constant being won: they are burs, I can tell you;
theyll stick where they are thrown.
Boldness comes to me now, and brings me heart.
Prince Troilus, I have loved you night and day
For many weary months.
Why was my Cressid then so hard to win?
Hard to seem won: but I was won, my lord,
With the first glance that ever--pardon me--
If I confess much, you will play the tyrant.
I love you now; but not, till now, so much
But I might master it: in faith, I lie;
My thoughts were like unbridled children, grown
Too headstrong for their mother. See, we fools!
Why have I blabbd? who shall be true to us,
When we are so unsecret to ourselves?
But, though I loved you well, I wood you not;
And yet, good faith, I wishd myself a man,
Or that we women had mens privilege
Of speaking first. Sweet, bid me hold my tongue,
For in this rapture I shall surely speak
The thing I shall repent. See, see, your silence,
Cunning in dumbness, from my weakness draws
My very soul of counsel! stop my mouth.
And shall, albeit sweet music issues thence.
Pretty, i faith.
My lord, I do beseech you, pardon me;
Twas not my purpose, thus to beg a kiss:
I am ashamed. O heavens! what have I done?
For this time will I take my leave, my lord.
Your leave, sweet Cressid!
Leave! an you take leave till to-morrow morning,--
Pray you, content you.
What offends you, lady?
Sir, mine own company.
You cannot shun Yourself.
Let me go and try:
I have a kind of self resides with you;
