But an unkind self, that itself will leave,
To be anothers fool. I would be gone:
Where is my wit? I know not what I speak.
Well know they what they speak that speak so wisely.
Perchance, my lord, I show more craft than love;
And fell so roundly to a large confession,
To angle for your thoughts: but you are wise,
Or else you love not, for to be wise and love
Exceeds mans might; that dwells with gods above.
O that I thought it could be in a woman--
As, if it can, I will presume in you--
To feed for aye her ramp and flames of love;
To keep her constancy in plight and youth,
Outliving beautys outward, with a mind
That doth renew swifter than blood decays!
Or that persuasion could but thus convince me,
That my integrity and truth to you
Might be affronted with the match and weight
Of such a winnowd purity in love;
How were I then uplifted! but, alas!
I am as true as truths simplicity
And simpler than the infancy of truth.
In that Ill war with you.
O virtuous fight,
When right with right wars who shall be most right!
True swains in love shall in the world to come
Approve their truths by Troilus: when their rhymes,
Full of protest, of oath and big compare,
Want similes, truth tired with iteration,
As true as steel, as plantage to the moon,
As sun to day, as turtle to her mate,
As iron to adamant, as earth to the centre,
Yet, after all comparisons of truth,
As truths authentic author to be cited,
As true as Troilus shall crown up the verse,
And sanctify the numbers.
Prophet may you be!
If I be false, or swerve a hair from truth,
When time is old and hath forgot itself,
When waterdrops have worn the stones of Troy,
And blind oblivion swallowd cities up,
And mighty states characterless are grated
To dusty nothing, yet let memory,
From false to false, among false maids in love,
Upbraid my falsehood! when theyve said as false
As air, as water, wind, or sandy earth,
As fox to lamb, as wolf to heifers calf,
Pard to the hind, or stepdame to her son,
Yea, let them say, to stick the heart of falsehood,
As false as Cressid.
Go to, a bargain made: seal it, seal it; Ill be the
witness. Here I hold your hand, here my cousins.
If ever you prove false one to another, since I have
taken such pains to bring you together, let all
pitiful goers-between be called to the worlds end
after my name; call them all Pandars; let all
constant men be Troiluses, all false women Cressids,
and all brokers-between Pandars! say, amen.
Amen.
Amen.
Amen. Whereupon I will show you a chamber with a
bed; which bed, because it shall not speak of your
pretty encounters, press it to death: away!
And Cupid grant all tongue-tied maidens here
Bed, chamber, Pandar to provide this gear!
Exeunt
SCENE III. The Grecian camp. Before Achilles tent.
Enter AGAMEMNON, ULYSSES, DIOMEDES, NESTOR, AJAX, MENELAUS, and CALCHAS
Now, princes, for the service I have done you,
The advantage of the time prompts me aloud
To call for recompense. Appear it to your mind
That, through the sight I bear in things to love,
I have abandond Troy, left my possession,
Incurrd a traitors name; exposed myself,
From certain and possessd conveniences,
To doubtful fortunes; sequestering from me all
That time, acquaintance, custom and condition
Made tame and most familiar to my nature,
And here, to do you service, am become
As new into the world, strange, unacquainted:
I do beseech you, as in way of taste,
To give me now a little benefit,
Out of those many registerd in promise,
Which, you say, live to come in my behalf.
What wouldst thou of us, Trojan? make demand.
You have a Trojan prisoner, calld Antenor,
Yesterday took: Troy holds him very dear.
Oft have you--often have you thanks therefore--
Desired my Cressid in right great exchange,
Whom Troy hath still denied: but this Antenor,
I know, is such a wrest in their affairs
That their negotiations all must slack,
Wanting his manage; and they will almost
Give us a prince of blood, a son of Priam,
In change of him: let him be sent, great princes,
And he shall buy my daughter; and her presence
Shall quite strike off all service I have done,
In most accepted pain.
Let Diomedes bear him,
And bring us Cressid hither: Calchas shall have
What he requests of us. Good Diomed,
Furnish you fairly for this interchange:
Withal bring word if Hector will to-morrow
Be answerd in his challenge: Ajax is ready.
This shall I undertake; and tis a burden
Which I am proud to bear.
Exeunt DIOMEDES and CALCHAS
Enter ACHILLES and PATROCLUS, before their tent
Achilles stands i the entrance of his tent:
Please it our general to pass strangely by him,
As if he were forgot; and, princes all,
Lay negligent and loose regard upon him:
I will come last. Tis like hell question me
Why such unplausive eyes are bent on him:
If so, I have derision medicinable,
To use between your strangeness and his pride,
Which his own will shall have desire to drink:
It may be good: pride hath no other glass
To show itself but pride, for supple knees
Feed arrogance and are the proud mans fees.
Well execute your purpose, and put on
A form of strangeness as we pass along:
So do each lord, and either greet him not,
Or else disdainfully, which shall shake him more
Than if not lookd on. I will lead the way.
What, comes the general to speak with me?
You know my mind, Ill fight no more gainst Troy.
What says Achilles? would he aught with us?
Would you, my lord, aught with the general?
No.
Nothing, my lord.
The better.
Exeunt AGAMEMNON and NESTOR
Good day, good day.
How do you? how do you?
Exit
What, does the cuckold scorn me?
How now, Patroclus!
Good morrow, Ajax.
Ha?
Good morrow.
Ay, and good next day too.
Exit
What mean these fellows? Know they not Achilles?
They pass by strangely: they were used to bend
To send their smiles before them to Achilles;
To come as humbly as they used to creep
To holy altars.
What, am I poor of late?
Tis certain, greatness, once falln out with fortune,
Must fall out with men too: what the declined is
He shall as soon read in the eyes of others
As feel in his own fall; for men, like butterflies,
Show not their mealy wings but to the summer,
And not a man, for being simply man,
Hath any honour, but honour for those honours
That are without him, as place, riches, favour,
Prizes of accident as oft as merit:
Which when they fall, as being slippery standers,
The love that leand on them as slippery too,
Do one pluck down another and together
Die in the fall. But tis not so with me:
Fortune and I are friends: I do enjoy
At ample point all that I did possess,
Save these mens looks; who do, methinks, find out
Something not worth in me such rich beholding
As they have often given. Here is Ulysses;
Ill interrupt his reading.
How now Ulysses!
Now, great Thetis son!
What are you reading?
A strange fellow here
Writes me: That man, how dearly ever parted,
How much in having, or without or in,
Cannot make boast to have that which he hath,
Nor feels not what he owes, but by reflection;
As when his virtues shining upon others
Heat them and they retort that heat again
To the first giver.
This is not strange, Ulysses.
The beauty that is borne here in the face
The bearer knows not, but commends itself
To others eyes; nor doth the eye itself,
That most pure spirit of sense, behold itself,
Not going from itself; but eye to eye opposed
Salutes each other with each others form;
For speculation turns not to itself,
Till it hath travelld and is mirrord there
Where it may see itself. This is not strange at all.
I do not strain at the position,--
It is familiar,--but at the authors drift;
Who, in his circumstance, expressly proves
That no man is the lord of any thing,
Though in and of him there be much consisting,
Till he communicate his parts to others:
Nor doth he of himself know them for aught
Till he behold them formd in the applause
Where theyre extended; who, like an arch,
reverberates
The voice again, or, like a gate of steel
Fronting the sun, receives and renders back
His figure and his heat.  I was much wrapt in this;
And apprehended here immediately
The unknown Ajax.
Heavens, what a man is there! a very horse,
That has he knows not what. Nature, what things there are
Most abject in regard and dear in use!
What things again most dear in the esteem
And poor in worth! Now shall we see to-morrow--
An act that very chance doth throw upon him--
Ajax renownd. O heavens, what some men do,
While some men leave to do!
How some men creep in skittish fortunes hall,
Whiles others play the idiots in her eyes!
How one man eats into anothers pride,
While pride is fasting in his wantonness!
To see these Grecian lords!--why, even already
They clap the lubber Ajax on the shoulder,
As if his foot were on brave Hectors breast
And great Troy shrieking.
I do believe it; for they passd by me
As misers do by beggars, neither gave to me
Good word nor look: what, are my deeds forgot?
Time hath, my lord, a wallet at his back,
Wherein he puts alms for oblivion,
A great-sized monster of ingratitudes:
Those scraps are good deeds past; which are devourd
As fast as they are made, forgot as soon
As done: perseverance, dear my lord,
Keeps honour bright: to have done is to hang
Quite out of fashion, like a rusty mail
In monumental mockery. Take the instant way;
For honour travels in a strait so narrow,
Where one but goes abreast: keep then the path;
For emulation hath a thousand sons
That one by one pursue: if you give way,
Or hedge aside from the direct forthright,
Like to an enterd tide, they all rush by
And leave you hindmost;
Or like a gallant horse falln in first rank,
Lie there for pavement to the abject rear,
Oer-run and trampled on: then what they do in present,
Though less than yours in past, must oertop yours;
For time is like a fashionable host
That slightly shakes his parting guest by the hand,
And with his arms outstretchd, as he would fly,
Grasps in the comer: welcome ever smiles,
And farewell goes out sighing. O, let not
virtue seek
Remuneration for the thing it was;
For beauty, wit,
High birth, vigour of bone, desert in service,
Love, friendship, charity, are subjects all
To envious and calumniating time.
One touch of nature makes the whole world kin,
That all with one consent praise new-born gawds,
Though they are made and moulded of things past,
And give to dust that is a little gilt
More laud than gilt oer-dusted.
The present eye praises the present object.
Then marvel not, thou great and complete man,
That all the Greeks begin to worship Ajax;
Since things in motion sooner catch the eye
Than what not stirs. The cry went once on thee,
And still it might, and yet it may again,
If thou wouldst not entomb thyself alive
And case thy reputation in thy tent;
Whose glorious deeds, but in these fields of late,
Made emulous missions mongst the gods themselves
And drave great Mars to faction.
Of this my privacy
I have strong reasons.
But gainst your privacy
The reasons are more potent and heroical:
Tis known, Achilles, that you are in love
With one of Priams daughters.
Ha! known!
Is that a wonder?
The providence thats in a watchful state
Knows almost every grain of Plutus gold,
Finds bottom in the uncomprehensive deeps,
Keeps place with thought and almost, like the gods,
Does thoughts unveil in their dumb cradles.
There is a mystery--with whom relation
Durst never meddle--in the soul of state;
Which hath an operation more divine
Than breath or pen can give expressure to:
All the commerce that you have had with Troy
As perfectly is ours as yours, my lord;
And better would it fit Achilles much
To throw down Hector than Polyxena:
But it must grieve young Pyrrhus now at home,
When fame shall in our islands sound her trump,
And all the Greekish girls shall tripping sing,
Great Hectors sister did Achilles win,
But our great Ajax bravely beat down him.
Farewell, my lord: I as your lover speak;
The fool slides oer the ice that you should break.
Exit
To this effect, Achilles, have I moved you:
A woman impudent and mannish grown
Is not more loathed than an effeminate man
In time of action. I stand condemnd for this;
They think my little stomach to the war
And your great love to me restrains you thus:
Sweet, rouse yourself; and the weak wanton Cupid
Shall from your neck unloose his amorous fold,
And, like a dew-drop from the lions mane,
Be shook to air.
Shall Ajax fight with Hector?
Ay, and perhaps receive much honour by him.
I see my reputation is at stake
My fame is shrewdly gored.
O, then, beware;
Those wounds heal ill that men do give themselves:
Omission to do what is necessary
Seals a commission to a blank of danger;
And danger, like an ague, subtly taints
Even then when we sit idly in the sun.
Go call Thersites hither, sweet Patroclus:
Ill send the fool to Ajax and desire him
To invite the Trojan lords after the combat
To see us here unarmd: I have a womans longing,
An appetite that I am sick withal,
To see great Hector in his weeds of peace,
To talk with him and to behold his visage,
Even to my full of view.
Enter THERSITES
A labour saved!
A wonder!
What?
Ajax goes up and down the field, asking for himself.
How so?
He must fight singly to-morrow with Hector, and is so
prophetically proud of an heroical cudgelling that he
raves in saying nothing.
How can that be?
Why, he stalks up and down like a peacock,--a stride
and a stand: ruminates like an hostess that hath no
arithmetic but her brain to set down her reckoning:
bites his lip with a politic regard, as who should
say There were wit in this head, an twould out;
and so there is, but it lies as coldly in him as fire
in a flint, which will not show without knocking.
The mans undone forever; for if Hector break not his
neck i the combat, hell break t himself in
vain-glory. He knows not me: I said Good morrow,
Ajax; and he replies Thanks, Agamemnon. What think
you of this man that takes me for the general? Hes
grown a very land-fish, language-less, a monster.
A plague of opinion! a man may wear it on both
sides, like a leather jerkin.
Thou must be my ambassador to him, Thersites.
Who, I? why, hell answer nobody; he professes not
answering: speaking is for beggars; he wears his
tongue ins arms. I will put on his presence: let
Patroclus make demands to me, you shall see the
pageant of Ajax.
To him, Patroclus; tell him I humbly desire the
valiant Ajax to invite the most valorous Hector
to come unarmed to my tent, and to procure
safe-conduct for his person of the magnanimous
and most illustrious six-or-seven-times-honoured
captain-general of the Grecian army, Agamemnon,
et cetera. Do this.
Jove bless great Ajax!
Hum!
I come from the worthy Achilles,--
Ha!
Who most humbly desires you to invite Hector to his tent,--
Hum!
And to procure safe-conduct from Agamemnon.
Agamemnon!
Ay, my lord.
Ha!
What say you tot?
God b wi you, with all my heart.
Your answer, sir.
If to-morrow be a fair day, by eleven oclock it will
go one way or other: howsoever, he shall pay for me
ere he has me.
Your answer, sir.
Fare you well, with all my heart.
Why, but he is not in this tune, is he?
No, but hes out o tune thus. What music will be in
him when Hector has knocked out his brains, I know
not; but, I am sure, none, unless the fiddler Apollo
get his sinews to make catlings on.
Come, thou shalt bear a letter to him straight.
Let me bear another to his horse; for thats the more
capable creature.
My mind is troubled, like a fountain stirrd;
And I myself see not the bottom of it.
Exeunt ACHILLES and PATROCLUS
Would the fountain of your mind were clear again,
that I might water an ass at it! I had rather be a
tick in a sheep than such a valiant ignorance.
Exit
ACT IV
SCENE I. Troy. A street.
Enter, from one side, AENEAS, and Servant with a  torch; from the other, PARIS, DEIPHOBUS, ANTENOR, DIOMEDES, and others, with torches
See, ho! who is that there?
It is the Lord AEneas.
Is the prince there in person?
Had I so good occasion to lie long
As you, prince Paris, nothing but heavenly business
Should rob my bed-mate of my company.
Thats my mind too. Good morrow, Lord AEneas.
A valiant Greek, AEneas,--take his hand,--
Witness the process of your speech, wherein
You told how Diomed, a whole week by days,
Did haunt you in the field.
Health to you, valiant sir,
During all question of the gentle truce;
But when I meet you armd, as black defiance
As heart can think or courage execute.
The one and other Diomed embraces.
Our bloods are now in calm; and, so long, health!
But when contention and occasion meet,
By Jove, Ill play the hunter for thy life
With all my force, pursuit and policy.
And thou shalt hunt a lion, that will fly
With his face backward. In humane gentleness,
Welcome to Troy! now, by Anchises life,
Welcome, indeed! By Venus hand I swear,
No man alive can love in such a sort
The thing he means to kill more excellently.
We sympathize: Jove, let AEneas live,
If to my sword his fate be not the glory,
A thousand complete courses of the sun!
But, in mine emulous honour, let him die,
With every joint a wound, and that to-morrow!
We know each other well.
We do; and long to know each other worse.
This is the most despiteful gentle greeting,
The noblest hateful love, that eer I heard of.
What business, lord, so early?
I was sent for to the king; but why, I know not.
His purpose meets you: twas to bring this Greek
To Calchas house, and there to render him,
For the enfreed Antenor, the fair Cressid:
Lets have your company, or, if you please,
Haste there before us: I constantly do think--
Or rather, call my thought a certain knowledge--
My brother Troilus lodges there to-night:
Rouse him and give him note of our approach.
With the whole quality wherefore: I fear
We shall be much unwelcome.
That I assure you:
Troilus had rather Troy were borne to Greece
Than Cressid borne from Troy.
There is no help;
The bitter disposition of the time
Will have it so. On, lord; well follow you.
Good morrow, all.
Exit with Servant
And tell me, noble Diomed, faith, tell me true,
Even in the soul of sound good-fellowship,
Who, in your thoughts, merits fair Helen best,
Myself or Menelaus?
Both alike:
He merits well to have her, that doth seek her,
Not making any scruple of her soilure,
With such a hell of pain and world of charge,
And you as well to keep her, that defend her,
Not palating the taste of her dishonour,
With such a costly loss of wealth and friends:
He, like a puling cuckold, would drink up
The lees and dregs of a flat tamed piece;
You, like a lecher, out of whorish loins
Are pleased to breed out your inheritors:
Both merits poised, each weighs nor less nor more;
But he as he, the heavier for a whore.
You are too bitter to your countrywoman.
Shes bitter to her country: hear me, Paris:
For every false drop in her bawdy veins
A Grecians life hath sunk; for every scruple
Of her contaminated carrion weight,
A Trojan hath been slain: since she could speak,
She hath not given so many good words breath
As for her Greeks and Trojans sufferd death.
Fair Diomed, you do as chapmen do,
Dispraise the thing that you desire to buy:
But we in silence hold this virtue well,
Well but commend what we intend to sell.
Here lies our way.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. Court of Pandarus house.
Enter TROILUS and CRESSIDA
Dear, trouble not yourself: the morn is cold.
Then, sweet my lord, Ill call mine uncle down;
He shall unbolt the gates.
Trouble him not;
To bed, to bed: sleep kill those pretty eyes,
And give as soft attachment to thy senses
As infants empty of all thought!
Good morrow, then.
I prithee now, to bed.
Are you a-weary of me?
O Cressida! but that the busy day,
Waked by the lark, hath roused the ribald crows,
And dreaming night will hide our joys no longer,
I would not from thee.
Night hath been too brief.
Beshrew the witch! with venomous wights she stays
As tediously as hell, but flies the grasps of love
With wings more momentary-swift than thought.
You will catch cold, and curse me.
Prithee, tarry:
You men will never tarry.
O foolish Cressid! I might have still held off,
And then you would have tarried. Hark!
theres one up.
[Within]  What, s all the doors open here?
It is your uncle.
A pestilence on him! now will he be mocking:
I shall have such a life!
Enter PANDARUS
How now, how now! how go maidenheads? Here, you
maid! wheres my cousin Cressid?
Go hang yourself, you naughty mocking uncle!
You bring me to do, and then you flout me too.
To do what? to do what? let her say
what: what have I brought you to do?
Come, come, beshrew your heart! youll neer be good,
Nor suffer others.
Ha! ha! Alas, poor wretch! ah, poor capocchia!
hast not slept to-night? would he not, a naughty
man, let it sleep? a bugbear take him!
Did not I tell you? Would he were knockd i the head!
Knocking within
Whos that at door? good uncle, go and see.
My lord, come you again into my chamber:
You smile and mock me, as if I meant naughtily.
Ha, ha!
Come, you are deceived, I think of no such thing.
Knocking within
How earnestly they knock! Pray you, come in:
I would not for half Troy have you seen here.
Exeunt TROILUS and CRESSIDA
Whos there? whats the matter? will you beat
down the door? How now! whats the matter?
Enter AENEAS
Good morrow, lord, good morrow.
Whos there? my Lord AEneas! By my troth,
I knew you not: what news with you so early?
Is not Prince Troilus here?
Here! what should he do here?
Come, he is here, my lord; do not deny him:
It doth import him much to speak with me.
Is he here, say you? tis more than I know, Ill
be sworn: for my own part, I came in late. What
should he do here?
Who!--nay, then: come, come, youll do him wrong
ere youre ware: youll be so true to him, to be
false to him: do not you know of him, but yet go
fetch him hither; go.
Re-enter TROILUS
How now! whats the matter?
My lord, I scarce have leisure to salute you,
My matter is so rash: there is at hand
Paris your brother, and Deiphobus,
The Grecian Diomed, and our Antenor
Deliverd to us; and for him forthwith,
Ere the first sacrifice, within this hour,
We must give up to Diomedes hand
The Lady Cressida.
Is it so concluded?
By Priam and the general state of Troy:
They are at hand and ready to effect it.
How my achievements mock me!
I will go meet them: and, my Lord AEneas,
We met by chance; you did not find me here.
Good, good, my lord; the secrets of nature
Have not more gift in taciturnity.
Exeunt TROILUS and AENEAS
Ist possible? no sooner got but lost? The devil
take Antenor! the young prince will go mad: a
plague upon Antenor! I would they had broke s neck!
Re-enter CRESSIDA
How now! whats the matter? who was here?
Ah, ah!
Why sigh you so profoundly? wheres my lord? gone!
Tell me, sweet uncle, whats the matter?
Would I were as deep under the earth as I am above!
O the gods! whats the matter?
Prithee, get thee in: would thou hadst neer been
born! I knew thou wouldst be his death. O, poor
gentleman! A plague upon Antenor!
Good uncle, I beseech you, on my knees! beseech you,
whats the matter?
Thou must be gone, wench, thou must be gone; thou
art changed for Antenor: thou must to thy father,
and be gone from Troilus: twill be his death;
twill be his bane; he cannot bear it.
O you immortal gods! I will not go.
Thou must.
I will not, uncle: I have forgot my father;
I know no touch of consanguinity;
No kin no love, no blood, no soul so near me
As the sweet Troilus. O you gods divine!
Make Cressids name the very crown of falsehood,
If ever she leave Troilus! Time, force, and death,
Do to this body what extremes you can;
But the strong base and building of my love
Is as the very centre of the earth,
Drawing all things to it. Ill go in and weep,--
Do, do.
Tear my bright hair and scratch my praised cheeks,
Crack my clear voice with sobs and break my heart
With sounding Troilus. I will not go from Troy.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. Street before Pandarus house.
Enter PARIS, TROILUS, AENEAS, DEIPHOBUS, ANTENOR, and DIOMEDES
It is great morning, and the hour prefixd
Of her delivery to this valiant Greek
Comes fast upon. Good my brother Troilus,
Tell you the lady what she is to do,
And haste her to the purpose.
Walk into her house;
Ill bring her to the Grecian presently:
And to his hand when I deliver her,
Think it an altar, and thy brother Troilus
A priest there offering to it his own heart.
Exit
I know what tis to love;
And would, as I shall pity, I could help!
Please you walk in, my lords.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The same. Pandarus house.
Enter PANDARUS and CRESSIDA
Be moderate, be moderate.
Why tell you me of moderation?
The grief is fine, full, perfect, that I taste,
And violenteth in a sense as strong
As that which causeth it: how can I moderate it?
If I could temporize with my affection,
Or brew it to a weak and colder palate,
The like allayment could I give my grief.
My love admits no qualifying dross;
No more my grief, in such a precious loss.
Here, here, here he comes.
Enter TROILUS
Ah, sweet ducks!
O Troilus! Troilus!
Embracing him
What a pair of spectacles is here!
Let me embrace too. O heart, as the goodly saying is,
--O heart, heavy heart,
Why sighst thou without breaking?
where he answers again,
Because thou canst not ease thy smart
By friendship nor by speaking.
There was never a truer rhyme. Let us cast away
nothing, for we may live to have need of such a
verse: we see it, we see it. How now, lambs?
Cressid, I love thee in so straind a purity,
That the blessd gods, as angry with my fancy,
More bright in zeal than the devotion which
Cold lips blow to their deities, take thee from me.
Have the gods envy?
Ay, ay, ay, ay; tis too plain a case.
And is it true that I must go from Troy?
A hateful truth.
What, and from Troilus too?
From Troy and Troilus.
Is it possible?
And suddenly; where injury of chance
Puts back leave-taking, justles roughly by
All time of pause, rudely beguiles our lips
Of all rejoindure, forcibly prevents
Our lockd embrasures, strangles our dear vows
Even in the birth of our own labouring breath:
We two, that with so many thousand sighs
Did buy each other, must poorly sell ourselves
With the rude brevity and discharge of one.
Injurious time now with a robbers haste
Crams his rich thievery up, he knows not how:
As many farewells as be stars in heaven,
With distinct breath and consignd kisses to them,
He fumbles up into a lose adieu,
And scants us with a single famishd kiss,
Distasted with the salt of broken tears.
[Within]  My lord, is the lady ready?
Hark! you are calld: some say the Genius so
Cries come to him that instantly must die.
Bid them have patience; she shall come anon.
Where are my tears? rain, to lay this wind, or
my heart will be blown up by the root.
Exit
I must then to the Grecians?
No remedy.
A woful Cressid mongst the merry Greeks!
When shall we see again?
Hear me, my love: be thou but true of heart,--
I true! how now! what wicked deem is this?
Nay, we must use expostulation kindly,
For it is parting from us:
I speak not be thou true, as fearing thee,
For I will throw my glove to Death himself,
That theres no maculation in thy heart:
But be thou true, say I, to fashion in
My sequent protestation; be thou true,
And I will see thee.
O, you shall be exposed, my lord, to dangers
As infinite as imminent! but Ill be true.
And Ill grow friend with danger. Wear this sleeve.
And you this glove. When shall I see you?
I will corrupt the Grecian sentinels,
To give thee nightly visitation.
But yet be true.
O heavens! be true again!
Hear while I speak it, love:
The Grecian youths are full of quality;
Theyre loving, well composed with gifts of nature,
Flowing and swelling oer with arts and exercise:
How novelty may move, and parts with person,
Alas, a kind of godly jealousy--
Which, I beseech you, call a virtuous sin--
Makes me afeard.
O heavens! you love me not.
Die I a villain, then!
In this I do not call your faith in question
So mainly as my merit: I cannot sing,
Nor heel the high lavolt, nor sweeten talk,
Nor play at subtle games; fair virtues all,
To which the Grecians are most prompt and pregnant:
But I can tell that in each grace of these
There lurks a still and dumb-discoursive devil
That tempts most cunningly: but be not tempted.
Do you think I will?
No.
But something may be done that we will not:
And sometimes we are devils to ourselves,
When we will tempt the frailty of our powers,
Presuming on their changeful potency.
[Within]  Nay, good my lord,--
Come, kiss; and let us part.
[Within]  Brother Troilus!
Good brother, come you hither;
And bring AEneas and the Grecian with you.
My lord, will you be true?
Who, I? alas, it is my vice, my fault:
Whiles others fish with craft for great opinion,
I with great truth catch mere simplicity;
Whilst some with cunning gild their copper crowns,
With truth and plainness I do wear mine bare.
Fear not my truth: the moral of my wit
Is plain and true; theres all the reach of it.
Enter AENEAS, PARIS, ANTENOR, DEIPHOBUS, and DIOMEDES
Welcome, Sir Diomed! here is the lady
Which for Antenor we deliver you:
At the port, lord, Ill give her to thy hand,
And by the way possess thee what she is.
Entreat her fair; and, by my soul, fair Greek,
If eer thou stand at mercy of my sword,
Name Cressida and thy life shall be as safe
As Priam is in Ilion.
Fair Lady Cressid,
So please you, save the thanks this prince expects:
The lustre in your eye, heaven in your cheek,
Pleads your fair usage; and to Diomed
You shall be mistress, and command him wholly.
Grecian, thou dost not use me courteously,
To shame the zeal of my petition to thee
In praising her: I tell thee, lord of Greece,
She is as far high-soaring oer thy praises
As thou unworthy to be calld her servant.
I charge thee use her well, even for my charge;
For, by the dreadful Pluto, if thou dost not,
Though the great bulk Achilles be thy guard,
Ill cut thy throat.
O, be not moved, Prince Troilus:
Let me be privileged by my place and message,
To be a speaker free; when I am hence
Ill answer to my lust: and know you, lord,
Ill nothing do on charge: to her own worth
She shall be prized; but that you say bet so,
Ill speak it in my spirit and honour, no.
Come, to the port. Ill tell thee, Diomed,
This brave shall oft make thee to hide thy head.
Lady, give me your hand, and, as we walk,
To our own selves bend we our needful talk.
Exeunt TROILUS, CRESSIDA, and DIOMEDES
Trumpet within
Hark! Hectors trumpet.
How have we spent this morning!
The prince must think me tardy and remiss,
That sore to ride before him to the field.
Tis Troilus fault: come, come, to field with him.
Let us make ready straight.
Yea, with a bridegrooms fresh alacrity,
Let us address to tend on Hectors heels:
The glory of our Troy doth this day lie
On his fair worth and single chivalry.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The Grecian camp. Lists set out.
Enter AJAX, armed; AGAMEMNON, ACHILLES, PATROCLUS, MENELAUS, ULYSSES, NESTOR, and others
Here art thou in appointment fresh and fair,
Anticipating time with starting courage.
Give with thy trumpet a loud note to Troy,
Thou dreadful Ajax; that the appalled air
May pierce the head of the great combatant
And hale him hither.
Thou, trumpet, theres my purse.
Now crack thy lungs, and split thy brazen pipe:
Blow, villain, till thy sphered bias cheek
Outswell the colic of puffd Aquilon:
Come, stretch thy chest and let thy eyes spout blood;
Thou blowst for Hector.
Trumpet sounds
No trumpet answers.
Tis but early days.
Is not yond Diomed, with Calchas daughter?
Tis he, I ken the manner of his gait;
He rises on the toe: that spirit of his
In aspiration lifts him from the earth.
Enter DIOMEDES, with CRESSIDA
Is this the Lady Cressid?
Even she.
Most dearly welcome to the Greeks, sweet lady.
Our general doth salute you with a kiss.
Yet is the kindness but particular;
Twere better she were kissd in general.
And very courtly counsel: Ill begin.
So much for Nestor.
Ill take what winter from your lips, fair lady:
Achilles bids you welcome.
I had good argument for kissing once.
But thats no argument for kissing now;
For this poppd Paris in his hardiment,
And parted thus you and your argument.
O deadly gall, and theme of all our scorns!
For which we lose our heads to gild his horns.
The first was Menelaus kiss; this, mine:
Patroclus kisses you.
O, this is trim!
Paris and I kiss evermore for him.
Ill have my kiss, sir. Lady, by your leave.
In kissing, do you render or receive?
Both take and give.
Ill make my match to live,
The kiss you take is better than you give;
Therefore no kiss.
Ill give you boot, Ill give you three for one.
Youre an odd man; give even or give none.
An odd man, lady! every man is odd.
No, Paris is not; for you know tis true,
That you are odd, and he is even with you.
You fillip me o the head.
No, Ill be sworn.
It were no match, your nail against his horn.
May I, sweet lady, beg a kiss of you?
You may.
I do desire it.
Why, beg, then.
Why then for Venus sake, give me a kiss,
When Helen is a maid again, and his.
I am your debtor, claim it when tis due.
Nevers my day, and then a kiss of you.
Lady, a word: Ill bring you to your father.
Exit with CRESSIDA
A woman of quick sense.
Fie, fie upon her!
Theres language in her eye, her cheek, her lip,
Nay, her foot speaks; her wanton spirits look out
At every joint and motive of her body.
O, these encounterers, so glib of tongue,
That give accosting welcome ere it comes,
And wide unclasp the tables of their thoughts
To every ticklish reader! set them down
For sluttish spoils of opportunity
And daughters of the game.
Trumpet within
The Trojans trumpet.
Yonder comes the troop.
Enter HECTOR, armed; AENEAS, TROILUS, and other Trojans, with Attendants
Hail, all you state of Greece! what shall be done
To him that victory commands? or do you purpose
A victor shall be known? will you the knights
Shall to the edge of all extremity
Pursue each other, or shall be divided
By any voice or order of the field?
Hector bade ask.
Which way would Hector have it?
He cares not; hell obey conditions.
Tis done like Hector; but securely done,
A little proudly, and great deal misprizing
The knight opposed.
If not Achilles, sir,
What is your name?
If not Achilles, nothing.
Therefore Achilles: but, whateer, know this:
In the extremity of great and little,
Valour and pride excel themselves in Hector;
The one almost as infinite as all,
The other blank as nothing. Weigh him well,
And that which looks like pride is courtesy.
This Ajax is half made of Hectors blood:
In love whereof, half Hector stays at home;
Half heart, half hand, half Hector comes to seek
This blended knight, half Trojan and half Greek.
A maiden battle, then? O, I perceive you.
Re-enter DIOMEDES
Here is Sir Diomed. Go, gentle knight,
Stand by our Ajax: as you and Lord AEneas
Consent upon the order of their fight,
So be it; either to the uttermost,
Or else a breath: the combatants being kin
Half stints their strife before their strokes begin.
AJAX and HECTOR enter the lists
They are opposed already.
What Trojan is that same that looks so heavy?
The youngest son of Priam, a true knight,
Not yet mature, yet matchless, firm of word,
Speaking in deeds and deedless in his tongue;
Not soon provoked nor being provoked soon calmd:
His heart and hand both open and both free;
For what he has he gives, what thinks he shows;
Yet gives he not till judgment guide his bounty,
Nor dignifies an impure thought with breath;
Manly as Hector, but more dangerous;
For Hector in his blaze of wrath subscribes
To tender objects, but he in heat of action
Is more vindicative than jealous love:
They call him Troilus, and on him erect
A second hope, as fairly built as Hector.
Thus says AEneas; one that knows the youth
Even to his inches, and with private soul
Did in great Ilion thus translate him to me.
Alarum. Hector and Ajax fight
They are in action.
Now, Ajax, hold thine own!
Hector, thou sleepst;
Awake thee!
His blows are well disposed: there, Ajax!
You must no more.
Trumpets cease
Princes, enough, so please you.
I am not warm yet; let us fight again.
As Hector pleases.
Why, then will I no more:
Thou art, great lord, my fathers sisters son,
A cousin-german to great Priams seed;
The obligation of our blood forbids
A gory emulation twixt us twain:
Were thy commixtion Greek and Trojan so
That thou couldst say This hand is Grecian all,
And this is Trojan; the sinews of this leg
All Greek, and this all Troy; my mothers blood
Runs on the dexter cheek, and this sinister
Bounds in my fathers; by Jove multipotent,
Thou shouldst not bear from me a Greekish member
Wherein my sword had not impressure made
Of our rank feud: but the just gods gainsay
That any drop thou borrowdst from thy mother,
My sacred aunt, should by my mortal sword
Be draind! Let me embrace thee, Ajax:
By him that thunders, thou hast lusty arms;
Hector would have them fall upon him thus:
Cousin, all honour to thee!
I thank thee, Hector
Thou art too gentle and too free a man:
I came to kill thee, cousin, and bear hence
A great addition earned in thy death.
Not Neoptolemus so mirable,
On whose bright crest Fame with her loudst Oyes
Cries This is he, could promise to himself
A thought of added honour torn from Hector.
There is expectance here from both the sides,
What further you will do.
Well answer it;
The issue is embracement: Ajax, farewell.
If I might in entreaties find success--
As seld I have the chance--I would desire
My famous cousin to our Grecian tents.
Tis Agamemnons wish, and great Achilles
Doth long to see unarmd the valiant Hector.
AEneas, call my brother Troilus to me,
And signify this loving interview
To the expecters of our Trojan part;
Desire them home. Give me thy hand, my cousin;
I will go eat with thee and see your knights.
Great Agamemnon comes to meet us here.
The worthiest of them tell me name by name;
But for Achilles, mine own searching eyes
Shall find him by his large and portly size.
Worthy of arms! as welcome as to one
That would be rid of such an enemy;
But thats no welcome: understand more clear,
Whats past and whats to come is strewd with husks
And formless ruin of oblivion;
But in this extant moment, faith and troth,
Straind purely from all hollow bias-drawing,
Bids thee, with most divine integrity,
From heart of very heart, great Hector, welcome.
I thank thee, most imperious Agamemnon.
[To TROILUS]  My well-famed lord of Troy, no
less to you.
Let me confirm my princely brothers greeting:
