You brace of warlike brothers, welcome hither.
Who must we answer?
The noble Menelaus.
O, you, my lord? by Mars his gauntlet, thanks!
Mock not, that I affect the untraded oath;
Your quondam wife swears still by Venus glove:
Shes well, but bade me not commend her to you.
Name her not now, sir; shes a deadly theme.
O, pardon; I offend.
I have, thou gallant Trojan, seen thee oft
Labouring for destiny make cruel way
Through ranks of Greekish youth, and I have seen thee,
As hot as Perseus, spur thy Phrygian steed,
Despising many forfeits and subduements,
When thou hast hung thy advanced sword i the air,
Not letting it decline on the declined,
That I have said to some my standers by
Lo, Jupiter is yonder, dealing life!
And I have seen thee pause and take thy breath,
When that a ring of Greeks have hemmd thee in,
Like an Olympian wrestling: this have I seen;
But this thy countenance, still lockd in steel,
I never saw till now. I knew thy grandsire,
And once fought with him: he was a soldier good;
But, by great Mars, the captain of us all,
Never saw like thee. Let an old man embrace thee;
And, worthy warrior, welcome to our tents.
Tis the old Nestor.
Let me embrace thee, good old chronicle,
That hast so long walkd hand in hand with time:
Most reverend Nestor, I am glad to clasp thee.
I would my arms could match thee in contention,
As they contend with thee in courtesy.
I would they could.
Ha!
By this white beard, Ild fight with thee to-morrow.
Well, welcome, welcome! I have seen the time.
I wonder now how yonder city stands
When we have here her base and pillar by us.
I know your favour, Lord Ulysses, well.
Ah, sir, theres many a Greek and Trojan dead,
Since first I saw yourself and Diomed
In Ilion, on your Greekish embassy.
Sir, I foretold you then what would ensue:
My prophecy is but half his journey yet;
For yonder walls, that pertly front your town,
Yond towers, whose wanton tops do buss the clouds,
Must kiss their own feet.
I must not believe you:
There they stand yet, and modestly I think,
The fall of every Phrygian stone will cost
A drop of Grecian blood: the end crowns all,
And that old common arbitrator, Time,
Will one day end it.
So to him we leave it.
Most gentle and most valiant Hector, welcome:
After the general, I beseech you next
To feast with me and see me at my tent.
I shall forestall thee, Lord Ulysses, thou!
Now, Hector, I have fed mine eyes on thee;
I have with exact view perused thee, Hector,
And quoted joint by joint.
Is this Achilles?
I am Achilles.
Stand fair, I pray thee: let me look on thee.
Behold thy fill.
Nay, I have done already.
Thou art too brief: I will the second time,
As I would buy thee, view thee limb by limb.
O, like a book of sport thoult read me oer;
But theres more in me than thou understandst.
Why dost thou so oppress me with thine eye?
Tell me, you heavens, in which part of his body
Shall I destroy him? whether there, or there, or there?
That I may give the local wound a name
And make distinct the very breach whereout
Hectors great spirit flew: answer me, heavens!
It would discredit the blest gods, proud man,
To answer such a question: stand again:
Thinkst thou to catch my life so pleasantly
As to prenominate in nice conjecture
Where thou wilt hit me dead?
I tell thee, yea.
Wert thou an oracle to tell me so,
Id not believe thee. Henceforth guard thee well;
For Ill not kill thee there, nor there, nor there;
But, by the forge that stithied Mars his helm,
Ill kill thee every where, yea, oer and oer.
You wisest Grecians, pardon me this brag;
His insolence draws folly from my lips;
But Ill endeavour deeds to match these words,
Or may I never--
Do not chafe thee, cousin:
And you, Achilles, let these threats alone,
Till accident or purpose bring you tot:
You may have every day enough of Hector
If you have stomach; the general state, I fear,
Can scarce entreat you to be odd with him.
I pray you, let us see you in the field:
We have had pelting wars, since you refused
The Grecians cause.
Dost thou entreat me, Hector?
To-morrow do I meet thee, fell as death;
To-night all friends.
Thy hand upon that match.
First, all you peers of Greece, go to my tent;
There in the full convive we: afterwards,
As Hectors leisure and your bounties shall
Concur together, severally entreat him.
Beat loud the tabourines, let the trumpets blow,
That this great soldier may his welcome know.
Exeunt all except TROILUS and ULYSSES
My Lord Ulysses, tell me, I beseech you,
In what place of the field doth Calchas keep?
At Menelaus tent, most princely Troilus:
There Diomed doth feast with him to-night;
Who neither looks upon the heaven nor earth,
But gives all gaze and bent of amorous view
On the fair Cressid.
Shall sweet lord, be bound to you so much,
After we part from Agamemnons tent,
To bring me thither?
You shall command me, sir.
As gentle tell me, of what honour was
This Cressida in Troy? Had she no lover there
That wails her absence?
O, sir, to such as boasting show their scars
A mock is due. Will you walk on, my lord?
She was beloved, she loved; she is, and doth:
But still sweet love is food for fortunes tooth.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. The Grecian camp. Before Achilles tent.
Enter ACHILLES and PATROCLUS
Ill heat his blood with Greekish wine to-night,
Which with my scimitar Ill cool to-morrow.
Patroclus, let us feast him to the height.
Here comes Thersites.
Enter THERSITES
How now, thou core of envy!
Thou crusty batch of nature, whats the news?
Why, thou picture of what thou seemest, and idol
of idiot worshippers, heres a letter for thee.
From whence, fragment?
Why, thou full dish of fool, from Troy.
Who keeps the tent now?
The surgeons box, or the patients wound.
Well said, adversity! and what need these tricks?
Prithee, be silent, boy; I profit not by thy talk:
thou art thought to be Achilles male varlet.
Male varlet, you rogue! whats that?
Why, his masculine whore. Now, the rotten diseases
of the south, the guts-griping, ruptures, catarrhs,
loads o gravel i the back, lethargies, cold
palsies, raw eyes, dirt-rotten livers, wheezing
lungs, bladders full of imposthume, sciaticas,
limekilns i the palm, incurable bone-ache, and the
rivelled fee-simple of the tetter, take and take
again such preposterous discoveries!
Why thou damnable box of envy, thou, what meanest
thou to curse thus?
Do I curse thee?
Why no, you ruinous butt, you whoreson
indistinguishable cur, no.
No! why art thou then exasperate, thou idle
immaterial skein of sleave-silk, thou green sarcenet
flap for a sore eye, thou tassel of a prodigals
purse, thou? Ah, how the poor world is pestered
with such waterflies, diminutives of nature!
Out, gall!
Finch-egg!
My sweet Patroclus, I am thwarted quite
From my great purpose in to-morrows battle.
Here is a letter from Queen Hecuba,
A token from her daughter, my fair love,
Both taxing me and gaging me to keep
An oath that I have sworn. I will not break it:
Fall Greeks; fail fame; honour or go or stay;
My major vow lies here, this Ill obey.
Come, come, Thersites, help to trim my tent:
This night in banqueting must all be spent.
Away, Patroclus!
Exeunt ACHILLES and PATROCLUS
With too much blood and too little brain, these two
may run mad; but, if with too much brain and too
little blood they do, Ill be a curer of madmen.
Heres Agamemnon, an honest fellow enough and one
that loves quails; but he has not so much brain as
earwax: and the goodly transformation of Jupiter
there, his brother, the bull,--the primitive statue,
and oblique memorial of cuckolds; a thrifty
shoeing-horn in a chain, hanging at his brothers
leg,--to what form but that he is, should wit larded
with malice and malice forced with wit turn him to?
To an ass, were nothing; he is both ass and ox: to
an ox, were nothing; he is both ox and ass. To be a
dog, a mule, a cat, a fitchew, a toad, a lizard, an
owl, a puttock, or a herring without a roe, I would
not care; but to be Menelaus, I would conspire
against destiny. Ask me not, what I would be, if I
were not Thersites; for I care not to be the louse
of a lazar, so I were not Menelaus! Hey-day!
spirits and fires!
Enter HECTOR, TROILUS, AJAX, AGAMEMNON, ULYSSES, NESTOR, MENELAUS, and DIOMEDES, with lights
We go wrong, we go wrong.
No, yonder tis;
There, where we see the lights.
I trouble you.
No, not a whit.
Here comes himself to guide you.
Re-enter ACHILLES
Welcome, brave Hector; welcome, princes all.
So now, fair prince of Troy, I bid good night.
Ajax commands the guard to tend on you.
Thanks and good night to the Greeks general.
Good night, my lord.
Good night, sweet lord Menelaus.
Sweet draught: sweet quoth a! sweet sink,
sweet sewer.
Good night and welcome, both at once, to those
That go or tarry.
Good night.
Exeunt AGAMEMNON and MENELAUS
Old Nestor tarries; and you too, Diomed,
Keep Hector company an hour or two.
I cannot, lord; I have important business,
The tide whereof is now. Good night, great Hector.
Give me your hand.
[Aside to TROILUS]  Follow his torch; he goes to
Calchas tent:
Ill keep you company.
Sweet sir, you honour me.
And so, good night.
Exit DIOMEDES; ULYSSES and TROILUS following
Come, come, enter my tent.
Exeunt ACHILLES, HECTOR, AJAX, and NESTOR
That same Diomeds a false-hearted rogue, a most
unjust knave; I will no more trust him when he leers
than I will a serpent when he hisses: he will spend
his mouth, and promise, like Brabbler the hound:
but when he performs, astronomers foretell it; it
is prodigious, there will come some change; the sun
borrows of the moon, when Diomed keeps his
word. I will rather leave to see Hector, than
not to dog him: they say he keeps a Trojan
drab, and uses the traitor Calchas tent: Ill
after. Nothing but lechery! all incontinent varlets!
Exit
SCENE II. The same. Before Calchas tent.
Enter DIOMEDES
What, are you up here, ho? speak.
[Within]  Who calls?
Calchas, I think. Wheres your daughter?
[Within]  She comes to you.
Enter TROILUS and ULYSSES, at a distance; after them, THERSITES
Stand where the torch may not discover us.
Enter CRESSIDA
Cressid comes forth to him.
How now, my charge!
Now, my sweet guardian! Hark, a word with you.
Whispers
Yea, so familiar!
She will sing any man at first sight.
And any man may sing her, if he can take her cliff;
shes noted.
Will you remember?
Remember! yes.
Nay, but do, then;
And let your mind be coupled with your words.
What should she remember?
List.
Sweet honey Greek, tempt me no more to folly.
Roguery!
Nay, then,--
Ill tell you what,--
Foh, foh! come, tell a pin: you are forsworn.
In faith, I cannot: what would you have me do?
A juggling trick,--to be secretly open.
What did you swear you would bestow on me?
I prithee, do not hold me to mine oath;
Bid me do any thing but that, sweet Greek.
Good night.
Hold, patience!
How now, Trojan!
Diomed,--
No, no, good night: Ill be your fool no more.
Thy better must.
Hark, one word in your ear.
O plague and madness!
You are moved, prince; let us depart, I pray you,
Lest your displeasure should enlarge itself
To wrathful terms: this place is dangerous;
The time right deadly; I beseech you, go.
Behold, I pray you!
Nay, good my lord, go off:
You flow to great distraction; come, my lord.
I pray thee, stay.
You have not patience; come.
I pray you, stay; by hell and all hells torments
I will not speak a word!
And so, good night.
Nay, but you part in anger.
Doth that grieve thee?
O witherd truth!
Why, how now, lord!
By Jove,
I will be patient.
Guardian!--why, Greek!
Foh, foh! adieu; you palter.
In faith, I do not: come hither once again.
You shake, my lord, at something: will you go?
You will break out.
She strokes his cheek!
Come, come.
Nay, stay; by Jove, I will not speak a word:
There is between my will and all offences
A guard of patience: stay a little while.
How the devil Luxury, with his fat rump and
potato-finger, tickles these together! Fry, lechery, fry!
But will you, then?
In faith, I will, la; never trust me else.
Give me some token for the surety of it.
Ill fetch you one.
Exit
You have sworn patience.
Fear me not, sweet lord;
I will not be myself, nor have cognition
Of what I feel: I am all patience.
Re-enter CRESSIDA
Now the pledge; now, now, now!
Here, Diomed, keep this sleeve.
O beauty! where is thy faith?
My lord,--
I will be patient; outwardly I will.
You look upon that sleeve; behold it well.
He loved me--O false wench!--Givet me again.
Whose wast?
It is no matter, now I havet again.
I will not meet with you to-morrow night:
I prithee, Diomed, visit me no more.
Now she sharpens: well said, whetstone!
I shall have it.
What, this?
Ay, that.
O, all you gods! O pretty, pretty pledge!
Thy master now lies thinking in his bed
Of thee and me, and sighs, and takes my glove,
And gives memorial dainty kisses to it,
As I kiss thee. Nay, do not snatch it from me;
He that takes that doth take my heart withal.
I had your heart before, this follows it.
I did swear patience.
You shall not have it, Diomed; faith, you shall not;
Ill give you something else.
I will have this: whose was it?
It is no matter.
Come, tell me whose it was.
Twas ones that loved me better than you will.
But, now you have it, take it.
Whose was it?
By all Dianas waiting-women yond,
And by herself, I will not tell you whose.
To-morrow will I wear it on my helm,
And grieve his spirit that dares not challenge it.
Wert thou the devil, and worest it on thy horn,
It should be challenged.
Well, well, tis done, tis past: and yet it is not;
I will not keep my word.
Why, then, farewell;
Thou never shalt mock Diomed again.
You shall not go: one cannot speak a word,
But it straight starts you.
I do not like this fooling.
Nor I, by Pluto: but that that likes not you pleases me best.
What, shall I come? the hour?
Ay, come:--O Jove!--do come:--I shall be plagued.
Farewell till then.
Good night: I prithee, come.
Exit DIOMEDES
Troilus, farewell! one eye yet looks on thee
But with my heart the other eye doth see.
Ah, poor our sex! this fault in us I find,
The error of our eye directs our mind:
What error leads must err; O, then conclude
Minds swayd by eyes are full of turpitude.
Exit
A proof of strength she could not publish more,
Unless she said  My mind is now turnd whore.
Alls done, my lord.
It is.
Why stay we, then?
To make a recordation to my soul
Of every syllable that here was spoke.
But if I tell how these two did co-act,
Shall I not lie in publishing a truth?
Sith yet there is a credence in my heart,
An esperance so obstinately strong,
That doth invert the attest of eyes and ears,
As if those organs had deceptious functions,
Created only to calumniate.
Was Cressid here?
I cannot conjure, Trojan.
She was not, sure.
Most sure she was.
Why, my negation hath no taste of madness.
Nor mine, my lord: Cressid was here but now.
Let it not be believed for womanhood!
Think, we had mothers; do not give advantage
To stubborn critics, apt, without a theme,
For depravation, to square the general sex
By Cressids rule: rather think this not Cressid.
What hath she done, prince, that can soil our mothers?
Nothing at all, unless that this were she.
Will he swagger himself out ons own eyes?
This she? no, this is Diomeds Cressida:
If beauty have a soul, this is not she;
If souls guide vows, if vows be sanctimonies,
If sanctimony be the gods delight,
If there be rule in unity itself,
This is not she. O madness of discourse,
That cause sets up with and against itself!
Bi-fold authority! where reason can revolt
Without perdition, and loss assume all reason
Without revolt: this is, and is not, Cressid.
Within my soul there doth conduce a fight
Of this strange nature that a thing inseparate
Divides more wider than the sky and earth,
And yet the spacious breadth of this division
Admits no orifex for a point as subtle
As Ariachnes broken woof to enter.
Instance, O instance! strong as Plutos gates;
Cressid is mine, tied with the bonds of heaven:
Instance, O instance! strong as heaven itself;
The bonds of heaven are slippd, dissolved, and loosed;
And with another knot, five-finger-tied,
The fractions of her faith, orts of her love,
The fragments, scraps, the bits and greasy relics
Of her oer-eaten faith, are bound to Diomed.
May worthy Troilus be half attachd
With that which here his passion doth express?
Ay, Greek; and that shall be divulged well
In characters as red as Mars his heart
Inflamed with Venus: never did young man fancy
With so eternal and so fixd a soul.
Hark, Greek: as much as I do Cressid love,
So much by weight hate I her Diomed:
That sleeve is mine that hell bear on his helm;
Were it a casque composed by Vulcans skill,
My sword should bite it: not the dreadful spout
Which shipmen do the hurricano call,
Constringed in mass by the almighty sun,
Shall dizzy with more clamour Neptunes ear
In his descent than shall my prompted sword
Falling on Diomed.
Hell tickle it for his concupy.
O Cressid! O false Cressid! false, false, false!
Let all untruths stand by thy stained name,
And theyll seem glorious.
O, contain yourself
Your passion draws ears hither.
Enter AENEAS
I have been seeking you this hour, my lord:
Hector, by this, is arming him in Troy;
Ajax, your guard, stays to conduct you home.
Have with you, prince. My courteous lord, adieu.
Farewell, revolted fair! and, Diomed,
Stand fast, and wear a castle on thy head!
Ill bring you to the gates.
Accept distracted thanks.
Exeunt TROILUS, AENEAS, and ULYSSES
Would I could meet that rogue Diomed! I would
croak like a raven; I would bode, I would bode.
Patroclus will give me any thing for the
intelligence of this whore: the parrot will not
do more for an almond than he for a commodious drab.
Lechery, lechery; still, wars and lechery; nothing
else holds fashion: a burning devil take them!
Exit
SCENE III. Troy. Before Priams palace.
Enter HECTOR and ANDROMACHE
When was my lord so much ungently temperd,
To stop his ears against admonishment?
Unarm, unarm, and do not fight to-day.
You train me to offend you; get you in:
By all the everlasting gods, Ill go!
My dreams will, sure, prove ominous to the day.
No more, I say.
Enter CASSANDRA
Where is my brother Hector?
Here, sister; armd, and bloody in intent.
Consort with me in loud and dear petition,
Pursue we him on knees; for I have dreamd
Of bloody turbulence, and this whole night
Hath nothing been but shapes and forms of slaughter.
O, tis true.
Ho! bid my trumpet sound!
No notes of sally, for the heavens, sweet brother.
Be gone, I say: the gods have heard me swear.
The gods are deaf to hot and peevish vows:
They are polluted offerings, more abhorrd
Than spotted livers in the sacrifice.
O, be persuaded! do not count it holy
To hurt by being just: it is as lawful,
For we would give much, to use violent thefts,
And rob in the behalf of charity.
It is the purpose that makes strong the vow;
But vows to every purpose must not hold:
Unarm, sweet Hector.
Hold you still, I say;
Mine honour keeps the weather of my fate:
Lie every man holds dear; but the brave man
Holds honour far more precious-dear than life.
Enter TROILUS
How now, young man! meanst thou to fight to-day?
Cassandra, call my father to persuade.
Exit CASSANDRA
No, faith, young Troilus; doff thy harness, youth;
I am to-day i the vein of chivalry:
Let grow thy sinews till their knots be strong,
And tempt not yet the brushes of the war.
Unarm thee, go, and doubt thou not, brave boy,
Ill stand to-day for thee and me and Troy.
Brother, you have a vice of mercy in you,
Which better fits a lion than a man.
What vice is that, good Troilus? chide me for it.
When many times the captive Grecian falls,
Even in the fan and wind of your fair sword,
You bid them rise, and live.
O,tis fair play.
Fools play, by heaven, Hector.
How now! how now!
For the love of all the gods,
Lets leave the hermit pity with our mothers,
And when we have our armours buckled on,
The venomd vengeance ride upon our swords,
Spur them to ruthful work, rein them from ruth.
Fie, savage, fie!
Hector, then tis wars.
Troilus, I would not have you fight to-day.
Who should withhold me?
Not fate, obedience, nor the hand of Mars
Beckoning with fiery truncheon my retire;
Not Priamus and Hecuba on knees,
Their eyes oergalled with recourse of tears;
Not you, my brother, with your true sword drawn,
Opposed to  hinder me, should stop my way,
But by my ruin.
Re-enter CASSANDRA, with PRIAM
Lay hold upon him, Priam, hold him fast:
He is thy crutch; now if thou lose thy stay,
Thou on him leaning, and all Troy on thee,
Fall all together.
Come, Hector, come, go back:
Thy wife hath dreamd; thy mother hath had visions;
Cassandra doth foresee; and I myself
Am like a prophet suddenly enrapt
To tell thee that this day is ominous:
Therefore, come back.
AEneas is a-field;
And I do stand engaged to many Greeks,
Even in the faith of valour, to appear
This morning to them.
Ay, but thou shalt not go.
I must not break my faith.
You know me dutiful; therefore, dear sir,
Let me not shame respect; but give me leave
To take that course by your consent and voice,
Which you do here forbid me, royal Priam.
O Priam, yield not to him!
Do not, dear father.
Andromache, I am offended with you:
Upon the love you bear me, get you in.
Exit ANDROMACHE
This foolish, dreaming, superstitious girl
Makes all these bodements.
O, farewell, dear Hector!
Look, how thou diest! look, how thy eye turns pale!
Look, how thy wounds do bleed at many vents!
Hark, how Troy roars! how Hecuba cries out!
How poor Andromache shrills her dolours forth!
Behold, distraction, frenzy and amazement,
Like witless antics, one another meet,
And all cry, Hector! Hectors dead! O Hector!
Away! away!
Farewell: yet, soft! Hector! take my leave:
Thou dost thyself and all our Troy deceive.
Exit
You are amazed, my liege, at her exclaim:
Go in and cheer the town: well forth and fight,
Do deeds worth praise and tell you them at night.
Farewell: the gods with safety stand about thee!
Exeunt severally PRIAM and HECTOR. Alarums
They are at it, hark! Proud Diomed, believe,
I come to lose my arm, or win my sleeve.
Enter PANDARUS
Do you hear, my lord? do you hear?
What now?
Heres a letter come from yond poor girl.
Let me read.
A whoreson tisick, a whoreson rascally tisick so
troubles me, and the foolish fortune of this girl;
and what one thing, what another, that I shall
leave you one o these days: and I have a rheum
in mine eyes too, and such an ache in my bones
that, unless a man were cursed, I cannot tell what
to think ont. What says she there?
Words, words, mere words, no matter from the heart:
The effect doth operate another way.
Tearing the letter
Go, wind, to wind, there turn and change together.
My love with words and errors still she feeds;
But edifies another with her deeds.
Exeunt severally
SCENE IV. Plains between Troy and the Grecian camp.
Alarums: excursions. Enter THERSITES
Now they are clapper-clawing one another; Ill go
look on. That dissembling abominable varlets Diomed,
has got that same scurvy doting foolish young knaves
sleeve of Troy there in his helm: I would fain see
them meet; that that same young Trojan ass, that
loves the whore there, might send that Greekish
whore-masterly villain, with the sleeve, back to the
dissembling luxurious drab, of a sleeveless errand.
O the tother side, the policy of those crafty
swearing rascals, that stale old mouse-eaten dry
cheese, Nestor, and that same dog-fox, Ulysses, is
not proved worthy a blackberry: they set me up, in
policy, that mongrel cur, Ajax, against that dog of
as bad a kind, Achilles: and now is the cur Ajax
prouder than the cur Achilles, and will not arm
to-day; whereupon the Grecians begin to proclaim
barbarism, and policy grows into an ill opinion.
Soft! here comes sleeve, and tother.
Enter DIOMEDES, TROILUS following
Fly not; for shouldst thou take the river Styx,
I would swim after.
Thou dost miscall retire:
I do not fly, but advantageous care
Withdrew me from the odds of multitude:
Have at thee!
Hold thy whore, Grecian!--now for thy whore,
Trojan!--now the sleeve, now the sleeve!
Exeunt TROILUS and DIOMEDES, fighting
Enter HECTOR
What art thou, Greek? art thou for Hectors match?
Art thou of blood and honour?
No, no, I am a rascal; a scurvy railing knave:
a very filthy rogue.
I do believe thee: live.
Exit
God-a-mercy, that thou wilt believe me; but a
plague break thy neck for frightening me! Whats
become of the wenching rogues? I think they have
swallowed one another: I would laugh at that
miracle: yet, in a sort, lechery eats itself.
Ill seek them.
Exit
SCENE V. Another part of the plains.
Enter DIOMEDES and a Servant
Go, go, my servant, take thou Troilus horse;
Present the fair steed to my lady Cressid:
Fellow, commend my service to her beauty;
Tell her I have chastised the amorous Trojan,
And am her knight by proof.
I go, my lord.
Exit
Enter AGAMEMNON
Renew, renew! The fierce Polydamas
Hath beat down Menon: bastard Margarelon
Hath Doreus prisoner,
And stands colossus-wise, waving his beam,
Upon the pashed corses of the kings
Epistrophus and Cedius: Polyxenes is slain,
Amphimachus and Thoas deadly hurt,
Patroclus taen or slain, and Palamedes
Sore hurt and bruised: the dreadful Sagittary
Appals our numbers: haste we, Diomed,
To reinforcement, or we perish all.
Enter NESTOR
Go, bear Patroclus body to Achilles;
And bid the snail-paced Ajax arm for shame.
There is a thousand Hectors in the field:
Now here he fights on Galathe his horse,
And there lacks work; anon hes there afoot,
And there they fly or die, like scaled sculls
Before the belching whale; then is he yonder,
And there the strawy Greeks, ripe for his edge,
Fall down before him, like the mowers swath:
Here, there, and every where, he leaves and takes,
Dexterity so obeying appetite
That what he will he does, and does so much
That proof is calld impossibility.
Enter ULYSSES
O, courage, courage, princes! great Achilles
Is arming, weeping, cursing, vowing vengeance:
Patroclus wounds have roused his drowsy blood,
Together with his mangled Myrmidons,
That noseless, handless, hackd and chippd, come to him,
Crying on Hector. Ajax hath lost a friend
And foams at mouth, and he is armd and at it,
Roaring for Troilus, who hath done to-day
Mad and fantastic execution,
Engaging and redeeming of himself
With such a careless force and forceless care
As if that luck, in very spite of cunning,
Bade him win all.
Enter AJAX
Troilus! thou coward Troilus!
Exit
Ay, there, there.
So, so, we draw together.
Enter ACHILLES
Where is this Hector?
Come, come, thou boy-queller, show thy face;
Know what it is to meet Achilles angry:
Hector? wheres Hector? I will none but Hector.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Another part of the plains.
Enter AJAX
Troilus, thou coward Troilus, show thy head!
Enter DIOMEDES
Troilus, I say! wheres Troilus?
What wouldst thou?
I would correct him.
Were I the general, thou shouldst have my office
Ere that correction. Troilus, I say! what, Troilus!
Enter TROILUS
O traitor Diomed! turn thy false face, thou traitor,
And pay thy life thou owest me for my horse!
Ha, art thou there?
Ill fight with him alone: stand, Diomed.
He is my prize; I will not look upon.
Come, both you cogging Greeks; have at you both!
Exeunt, fighting
Enter HECTOR
Yea, Troilus? O, well fought, my youngest brother!
Enter ACHILLES
Now do I see thee, ha! have at thee, Hector!
Pause, if thou wilt.
I do disdain thy courtesy, proud Trojan:
Be happy that my arms are out of use:
My rest and negligence befriends thee now,
But thou anon shalt hear of me again;
Till when, go seek thy fortune.
Exit
Fare thee well:
I would have been much more a fresher man,
Had I expected thee. How now, my brother!
Re-enter TROILUS
Ajax hath taen AEneas: shall it be?
No, by the flame of yonder glorious heaven,
He shall not carry him: Ill be taen too,
Or bring him off: fate, hear me what I say!
I reck not though I end my life to-day.
Exit
Enter one in sumptuous armour
Stand, stand, thou Greek; thou art a goodly mark:
No? wilt thou not? I like thy armour well;
Ill frush it and unlock the rivets all,
But Ill be master of it: wilt thou not,
beast, abide?
Why, then fly on, Ill hunt thee for thy hide.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Another part of the plains.
Enter ACHILLES, with Myrmidons
Come here about me, you my Myrmidons;
Mark what I say. Attend me where I wheel:
Strike not a stroke, but keep yourselves in breath:
And when I have the bloody Hector found,
Empale him with your weapons round about;
In fellest manner execute your aims.
Follow me, sirs, and my proceedings eye:
It is decreed Hector the great must die.
Exeunt
Enter MENELAUS and PARIS, fighting: then THERSITES
The cuckold and the cuckold-maker are at it. Now,
bull! now, dog! Loo, Paris, loo! now my double-
henned sparrow! loo, Paris, loo! The bull has the
game: ware horns, ho!
Exeunt PARIS and MENELAUS
Enter MARGARELON
Turn, slave, and fight.
What art thou?
A bastard son of Priams.
I am a bastard too; I love bastards: I am a bastard
begot, bastard instructed, bastard in mind, bastard
in valour, in every thing illegitimate. One bear will
not bite another, and wherefore should one bastard?
Take heed, the quarrels most ominous to us: if the
son of a whore fight for a whore, he tempts judgment:
farewell, bastard.
Exit
The devil take thee, coward!
Exit
SCENE VIII. Another part of the plains.
Enter HECTOR
Most putrefied core, so fair without,
Thy goodly armour thus hath cost thy life.
Now is my days work done; Ill take good breath:
Rest, sword; thou hast thy fill of blood and death.
Puts off his helmet and hangs his shield behind him
Enter ACHILLES and Myrmidons
Look, Hector, how the sun begins to set;
How ugly night comes breathing at his heels:
Even with the vail and darking of the sun,
To close the day up, Hectors life is done.
I am unarmd; forego this vantage, Greek.
Strike, fellows, strike; this is the man I seek.
HECTOR falls
So, Ilion, fall thou next! now, Troy, sink down!
Here lies thy heart, thy sinews, and thy bone.
On, Myrmidons, and cry you all amain,
Achilles hath the mighty Hector slain.
A retreat sounded
Hark! a retire upon our Grecian part.
The Trojan trumpets sound the like, my lord.
The dragon wing of night oerspreads the earth,
And, stickler-like, the armies separates.
My half-suppd sword, that frankly would have fed,
Pleased with this dainty bait, thus goes to bed.
Sheathes his sword
Come, tie his body to my horses tail;
Along the field I will the Trojan trail.
Exeunt
SCENE IX. Another part of the plains.
Enter AGAMEMNON, AJAX, MENELAUS, NESTOR, DIOMEDES, and others, marching. Shouts within
Hark! hark! what shout is that?
Peace, drums!
Within
Achilles! Achilles! Hectors slain! Achilles.
The bruit is, Hectors slain, and by Achilles.
If it be so, yet bragless let it be;
Great Hector was a man as good as he.
March patiently along: let one be sent
To pray Achilles see us at our tent.
If in his death the gods have us befriended,
Great Troy is ours, and our sharp wars are ended.
Exeunt, marching
SCENE X. Another part of the plains.
Enter AENEAS and Trojans
Stand, ho! yet are we masters of the field:
Never go home; here starve we out the night.
Enter TROILUS
Hector is slain.
Hector! the gods forbid!
Hes dead; and at the murderers horses tail,
In beastly sort, draggd through the shameful field.
Frown on, you heavens, effect your rage with speed!
Sit, gods, upon your thrones, and smile at Troy!
I say, at once let your brief plagues be mercy,
And linger not our sure destructions on!
My lord, you do discomfort all the host!
You understand me not that tell me so:
I do not speak of flight, of fear, of death,
But dare all imminence that gods and men
Address their dangers in. Hector is gone:
Who shall tell Priam so, or Hecuba?
Let him that will a screech-owl aye be calld,
Go in to Troy, and say there, Hectors dead:
There is a word will Priam turn to stone;
Make wells and Niobes of the maids and wives,
Cold statues of the youth, and, in a word,
Scare Troy out of itself. But, march away:
Hector is dead; there is no more to say.
Stay yet. You vile abominable tents,
Thus proudly pight upon our Phrygian plains,
Let Titan rise as early as he dare,
Ill through and through you! and, thou great-sized coward,
No space of earth shall sunder our two hates:
Ill haunt thee like a wicked conscience still,
That mouldeth goblins swift as frenzys thoughts.
Strike a free march to Troy! with comfort go:
Hope of revenge shall hide our inward woe.
Exeunt AENEAS and Trojans
As TROILUS is going out, enter, from the other side, PANDARUS
But hear you, hear you!
Hence, broker-lackey! ignomy and shame
Pursue thy life, and live aye with thy name!
Exit
A goodly medicine for my aching bones! O world!
world! world! thus is the poor agent despised!
O traitors and bawds, how earnestly are you set
a-work, and how ill requited! why should our
endeavour be so loved and the performance so loathed?
what verse for it? what instance for it? Let me see:
Full merrily the humble-bee doth sing,
Till he hath lost his honey and his sting;
And being once subdued in armed tail,
Sweet honey and sweet notes together fail.
Good traders in the flesh, set this in your
painted cloths.
As many as be here of panders hall,
Your eyes, half out, weep out at Pandars fall;
Or if you cannot weep, yet give some groans,
Though not for me, yet for your aching bones.
Brethren and sisters of the hold-door trade,
Some two months hence my will shall here be made:
It should be now, but that my fear is this,
Some galled goose of Winchester would hiss:
Till then Ill sweat and seek about for eases,
And at that time bequeathe you my diseases.
Exit
ACT I
SCENE I. DUKE ORSINOs palace.
Enter DUKE ORSINO, CURIO, and other Lords; Musicians attending
If music be the food of love, play on;
Give me excess of it, that, surfeiting,
The appetite may sicken, and so die.
That strain again! it had a dying fall:
O, it came oer my ear like the sweet sound,
That breathes upon a bank of violets,
Stealing and giving odour! Enough; no more:
Tis not so sweet now as it was before.
O spirit of love! how quick and fresh art thou,
That, notwithstanding thy capacity
Receiveth as the sea, nought enters there,
Of what validity and pitch soeer,
But falls into abatement and low price,
Even in a minute: so full of shapes is fancy
That it alone is high fantastical.
Will you go hunt, my lord?
What, Curio?
The hart.
Why, so I do, the noblest that I have:
O, when mine eyes did see Olivia first,
Methought she purged the air of pestilence!
That instant was I turnd into a hart;
And my desires, like fell and cruel hounds,
Eer since pursue me.
Enter VALENTINE
How now! what news from her?
So please my lord, I might not be admitted;
But from her handmaid do return this answer:
The element itself, till seven years heat,
Shall not behold her face at ample view;
But, like a cloistress, she will veiled walk
And water once a day her chamber round
With eye-offending brine: all this to season
A brothers dead love, which she would keep fresh
And lasting in her sad remembrance.
O, she that hath a heart of that fine frame
To pay this debt of love but to a brother,
How will she love, when the rich golden shaft
Hath killd the flock of all affections else
That live in her; when liver, brain and heart,
These sovereign thrones, are all supplied, and filld
Her sweet perfections with one self king!
Away before me to sweet beds of flowers:
Love-thoughts lie rich when canopied with bowers.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The sea-coast.
Enter VIOLA, a Captain, and Sailors
What country, friends, is this?
This is Illyria, lady.
And what should I do in Illyria?
My brother he is in Elysium.
Perchance he is not drownd: what think you, sailors?
It is perchance that you yourself were saved.
O my poor brother! and so perchance may he be.
True, madam: and, to comfort you with chance,
Assure yourself, after our ship did split,
When you and those poor number saved with you
Hung on our driving boat, I saw your brother,
Most provident in peril, bind himself,
Courage and hope both teaching him the practise,
To a strong mast that lived upon the sea;
Where, like Arion on the dolphins back,
I saw him hold acquaintance with the waves
So long as I could see.
For saying so, theres gold:
Mine own escape unfoldeth to my hope,
Whereto thy speech serves for authority,
The like of him. Knowst thou this country?
Ay, madam, well; for I was bred and born
Not three hours travel from this very place.
Who governs here?
A noble duke, in nature as in name.
What is the name?
Orsino.
Orsino! I have heard my father name him:
He was a bachelor then.
And so is now, or was so very late;
For but a month ago I went from hence,
And then twas fresh in murmur,--as, you know,
What great ones do the less will prattle of,--
That he did seek the love of fair Olivia.
Whats she?
A virtuous maid, the daughter of a count
That died some twelvemonth since, then leaving her
In the protection of his son, her brother,
Who shortly also died: for whose dear love,
They say, she hath abjured the company
And sight of men.
O that I served that lady
And might not be delivered to the world,
Till I had made mine own occasion mellow,
What my estate is!
That were hard to compass;
Because she will admit no kind of suit,
No, not the dukes.
