out for him: I frown the while; and perchance wind
up watch, or play with my--some rich jewel. Toby
approaches; courtesies there to me,--
Shall this fellow live?
Though our silence be drawn from us with cars, yet peace.
I extend my hand to him thus, quenching my familiar
smile with an austere regard of control,--
And does not Toby take you a blow o the lips then?
Saying, Cousin Toby, my fortunes having cast me on
your niece give me this prerogative of speech,--
What, what?
You must amend your drunkenness.
Out, scab!
Nay, patience, or we break the sinews of our plot.
Besides, you waste the treasure of your time with
a foolish knight,--
Thats me, I warrant you.
One Sir Andrew,--
I knew twas I; for many do call me fool.
What employment have we here?
Taking up the letter
Now is the woodcock near the gin.
O, peace! and the spirit of humour intimate reading
aloud to him!
By my life, this is my ladys hand these be her
very Cs, her Us and her Ts and thus makes she her
great Ps. It is, in contempt of question, her hand.
Her Cs, her Us and her Ts: why that?
[Reads]  To the unknown beloved, this, and my good
wishes:--her very phrases! By your leave, wax.
Soft! and the impressure her Lucrece, with which she
uses to seal: tis my lady. To whom should this be?
This wins him, liver and all.
[Reads]
Jove knows I love: But who?
Lips, do not move;
No man must know.
No man must know. What follows? the numbers
altered! No man must know: if this should be
thee, Malvolio?
Marry, hang thee, brock!
[Reads]
I may command where I adore;
But silence, like a Lucrece knife,
With bloodless stroke my heart doth gore:
M, O, A, I, doth sway my life.
A fustian riddle!
Excellent wench, say I.
M, O, A, I, doth sway my life. Nay, but first, let
me see, let me see, let me see.
What dish o poison has she dressed him!
And with what wing the staniel cheques at it!
I may command where I adore. Why, she may command
me: I serve her; she is my lady. Why, this is
evident to any formal capacity; there is no
obstruction in this: and the end,--what should
that alphabetical position portend? If I could make
that resemble something in me,--Softly! M, O, A,
I,--
O, ay, make up that: he is now at a cold scent.
Sowter will cry upont for all this, though it be as
rank as a fox.
M,--Malvolio; M,--why, that begins my name.
Did not I say he would work it out? the cur is
excellent at faults.
M,--but then there is no consonancy in the sequel;
that suffers under probation A should follow but O does.
And O shall end, I hope.
Ay, or Ill cudgel him, and make him cry O!
And then I comes behind.
Ay, an you had any eye behind you, you might see
more detraction at your heels than fortunes before
you.
M, O, A, I; this simulation is not as the former: and
yet, to crush this a little, it would bow to me, for
every one of these letters are in my name. Soft!
here follows prose.
Reads
If this fall into thy hand, revolve. In my stars I
am above thee; but be not afraid of greatness: some
are born great, some achieve greatness, and some
have greatness thrust upon em. Thy Fates open
their hands; let thy blood and spirit embrace them;
and, to inure thyself to what thou art like to be,
cast thy humble slough and appear fresh. Be
opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants; let
thy tongue tang arguments of state; put thyself into
the trick of singularity: she thus advises thee
that sighs for thee. Remember who commended thy
yellow stockings, and wished to see thee ever
cross-gartered: I say, remember. Go to, thou art
made, if thou desirest to be so; if not, let me see
thee a steward still, the fellow of servants, and
not worthy to touch Fortunes fingers. Farewell.
She that would alter services with thee,
THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY.
Daylight and champaign discovers not more: this is
open. I will be proud, I will read politic authors,
I will baffle Sir Toby, I will wash off gross
acquaintance, I will be point-devise the very man.
I do not now fool myself, to let imagination jade
me; for every reason excites to this, that my lady
loves me. She did commend my yellow stockings of
late, she did praise my leg being cross-gartered;
and in this she manifests herself to my love, and
with a kind of injunction drives me to these habits
of her liking. I thank my stars I am happy. I will
be strange, stout, in yellow stockings, and
cross-gartered, even with the swiftness of putting
on. Jove and my stars be praised! Here is yet a
postscript.
Reads
Thou canst not choose but know who I am. If thou
entertainest my love, let it appear in thy smiling;
thy smiles become thee well; therefore in my
presence still smile, dear my sweet, I prithee.
Jove, I thank thee: I will smile; I will do
everything that thou wilt have me.
Exit
I will not give my part of this sport for a pension
of thousands to be paid from the Sophy.
I could marry this wench for this device.
So could I too.
And ask no other dowry with her but such another jest.
Nor I neither.
Here comes my noble gull-catcher.
Re-enter MARIA
Wilt thou set thy foot o my neck?
Or o mine either?
Shall I play my freedom at traytrip, and become thy
bond-slave?
I faith, or I either?
Why, thou hast put him in such a dream, that when
the image of it leaves him he must run mad.
Nay, but say true; does it work upon him?
Like aqua-vitae with a midwife.
If you will then see the fruits of the sport, mark
his first approach before my lady: he will come to
her in yellow stockings, and tis a colour she
abhors, and cross-gartered, a fashion she detests;
and he will smile upon her, which will now be so
unsuitable to her disposition, being addicted to a
melancholy as she is, that it cannot but turn him
into a notable contempt. If you will see it, follow
me.
To the gates of Tartar, thou most excellent devil of wit!
Ill make one too.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. OLIVIAs garden.
Enter VIOLA, and Clown with a tabour
Save thee, friend, and thy music: dost thou live by
thy tabour?
No, sir, I live by the church.
Art thou a churchman?
No such matter, sir: I do live by the church; for
I do live at my house, and my house doth stand by
the church.
So thou mayst say, the king lies by a beggar, if a
beggar dwell near him; or, the church stands by thy
tabour, if thy tabour stand by the church.
You have said, sir. To see this age! A sentence is
but a cheveril glove to a good wit: how quickly the
wrong side may be turned outward!
Nay, thats certain; they that dally nicely with
words may quickly make them wanton.
I would, therefore, my sister had had no name, sir.
Why, man?
Why, sir, her names a word; and to dally with that
word might make my sister wanton. But indeed words
are very rascals since bonds disgraced them.
Thy reason, man?
Troth, sir, I can yield you none without words; and
words are grown so false, I am loath to prove
reason with them.
I warrant thou art a merry fellow and carest for nothing.
Not so, sir, I do care for something; but in my
conscience, sir, I do not care for you: if that be
to care for nothing, sir, I would it would make you invisible.
Art not thou the Lady Olivias fool?
No, indeed, sir; the Lady Olivia has no folly: she
will keep no fool, sir, till she be married; and
fools are as like husbands as pilchards are to
herrings; the husbands the bigger: I am indeed not
her fool, but her corrupter of words.
I saw thee late at the Count Orsinos.
Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun,
it shines every where. I would be sorry, sir, but
the fool should be as oft with your master as with
my mistress: I think I saw your wisdom there.
Nay, an thou pass upon me, Ill no more with thee.
Hold, theres expenses for thee.
Now Jove, in his next commodity of hair, send thee a beard!
By my troth, Ill tell thee, I am almost sick for
one;
Aside
though I would not have it grow on my chin. Is thy
lady within?
Would not a pair of these have bred, sir?
Yes, being kept together and put to use.
I would play Lord Pandarus of Phrygia, sir, to bring
a Cressida to this Troilus.
I understand you, sir; tis well begged.
The matter, I hope, is not great, sir, begging but
a beggar: Cressida was a beggar. My lady is
within, sir. I will construe to them whence you
come; who you are and what you would are out of my
welkin, I might say element, but the word is over-worn.
Exit
This fellow is wise enough to play the fool;
And to do that well craves a kind of wit:
He must observe their mood on whom he jests,
The quality of persons, and the time,
And, like the haggard, cheque at every feather
That comes before his eye. This is a practise
As full of labour as a wise mans art
For folly that he wisely shows is fit;
But wise men, folly-falln, quite taint their wit.
Enter SIR TOBY BELCH, and SIR ANDREW
Save you, gentleman.
And you, sir.
Dieu vous garde, monsieur.
Et vous aussi; votre serviteur.
I hope, sir, you are; and I am yours.
Will you encounter the house? my niece is desirous
you should enter, if your trade be to her.
I am bound to your niece, sir; I mean, she is the
list of my voyage.
Taste your legs, sir; put them to motion.
My legs do better understand me, sir, than I
understand what you mean by bidding me taste my legs.
I mean, to go, sir, to enter.
I will answer you with gait and entrance. But we
are prevented.
Enter OLIVIA and MARIA
Most excellent accomplished lady, the heavens rain
odours on you!
That youths a rare courtier: Rain odours; well.
My matter hath no voice, to your own most pregnant
and vouchsafed ear.
Odours, pregnant and vouchsafed: Ill get em
all three all ready.
Let the garden door be shut, and leave me to my hearing.
Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and MARIA
Give me your hand, sir.
My duty, madam, and most humble service.
What is your name?
Cesario is your servants name, fair princess.
My servant, sir! Twas never merry world
Since lowly feigning was calld compliment:
Youre servant to the Count Orsino, youth.
And he is yours, and his must needs be yours:
Your servants servant is your servant, madam.
For him, I think not on him: for his thoughts,
Would they were blanks, rather than filld with me!
Madam, I come to whet your gentle thoughts
On his behalf.
O, by your leave, I pray you,
I bade you never speak again of him:
But, would you undertake another suit,
I had rather hear you to solicit that
Than music from the spheres.
Dear lady,--
Give me leave, beseech you. I did send,
After the last enchantment you did here,
A ring in chase of you: so did I abuse
Myself, my servant and, I fear me, you:
Under your hard construction must I sit,
To force that on you, in a shameful cunning,
Which you knew none of yours: what might you think?
Have you not set mine honour at the stake
And baited it with all the unmuzzled thoughts
That tyrannous heart can think? To one of your receiving
Enough is shown: a cypress, not a bosom,
Hideth my heart. So, let me hear you speak.
I pity you.
Thats a degree to love.
No, not a grize; for tis a vulgar proof,
That very oft we pity enemies.
Why, then, methinks tis time to smile again.
O, world, how apt the poor are to be proud!
If one should be a prey, how much the better
To fall before the lion than the wolf!
Clock strikes
The clock upbraids me with the waste of time.
Be not afraid, good youth, I will not have you:
And yet, when wit and youth is come to harvest,
Your were is alike to reap a proper man:
There lies your way, due west.
Then westward-ho! Grace and good disposition
Attend your ladyship!
Youll nothing, madam, to my lord by me?
Stay:
I prithee, tell me what thou thinkest of me.
That you do think you are not what you are.
If I think so, I think the same of you.
Then think you right: I am not what I am.
I would you were as I would have you be!
Would it be better, madam, than I am?
I wish it might, for now I am your fool.
O, what a deal of scorn looks beautiful
In the contempt and anger of his lip!
A murderous guilt shows not itself more soon
Than love that would seem hid: loves night is noon.
Cesario, by the roses of the spring,
By maidhood, honour, truth and every thing,
I love thee so, that, maugre all thy pride,
Nor wit nor reason can my passion hide.
Do not extort thy reasons from this clause,
For that I woo, thou therefore hast no cause,
But rather reason thus with reason fetter,
Love sought is good, but given unsought better.
By innocence I swear, and by my youth
I have one heart, one bosom and one truth,
And that no woman has; nor never none
Shall mistress be of it, save I alone.
And so adieu, good madam: never more
Will I my masters tears to you deplore.
Yet come again; for thou perhaps mayst move
That heart, which now abhors, to like his love.
Exeunt
SCENE II. OLIVIAs house.
Enter SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN
No, faith, Ill not stay a jot longer.
Thy reason, dear venom, give thy reason.
You must needs yield your reason, Sir Andrew.
Marry, I saw your niece do more favours to the
counts serving-man than ever she bestowed upon me;
I sawt i the orchard.
Did she see thee the while, old boy? tell me that.
As plain as I see you now.
This was a great argument of love in her toward you.
Slight, will you make an ass o me?
I will prove it legitimate, sir, upon the oaths of
judgment and reason.
And they have been grand-jury-men since before Noah
was a sailor.
She did show favour to the youth in your sight only
to exasperate you, to awake your dormouse valour, to
put fire in your heart and brimstone in your liver.
You should then have accosted her; and with some
excellent jests, fire-new from the mint, you should
have banged the youth into dumbness. This was
looked for at your hand, and this was balked: the
double gilt of this opportunity you let time wash
off, and you are now sailed into the north of my
ladys opinion; where you will hang like an icicle
on a Dutchmans beard, unless you do redeem it by
some laudable attempt either of valour or policy.
Ant be any way, it must be with valour; for policy
I hate: I had as lief be a Brownist as a
politician.
Why, then, build me thy fortunes upon the basis of
valour. Challenge me the counts youth to fight
with him; hurt him in eleven places: my niece shall
take note of it; and assure thyself, there is no
love-broker in the world can more prevail in mans
commendation with woman than report of valour.
There is no way but this, Sir Andrew.
Will either of you bear me a challenge to him?
Go, write it in a martial hand; be curst and brief;
it is no matter how witty, so it be eloquent and fun
of invention: taunt him with the licence of ink:
if thou thoust him some thrice, it shall not be
amiss; and as many lies as will lie in thy sheet of
paper, although the sheet were big enough for the
bed of Ware in England, set em down: go, about it.
Let there be gall enough in thy ink, though thou
write with a goose-pen, no matter: about it.
Where shall I find you?
Well call thee at the cubiculo: go.
Exit SIR ANDREW
This is a dear manikin to you, Sir Toby.
I have been dear to him, lad, some two thousand
strong, or so.
We shall have a rare letter from him: but youll
not delivert?
Never trust me, then; and by all means stir on the
youth to an answer. I think oxen and wainropes
cannot hale them together. For Andrew, if he were
opened, and you find so much blood in his liver as
will clog the foot of a flea, Ill eat the rest of
the anatomy.
And his opposite, the youth, bears in his visage no
great presage of cruelty.
Enter MARIA
Look, where the youngest wren of nine comes.
If you desire the spleen, and will laugh yourself
into stitches, follow me. Yond gull Malvolio is
turned heathen, a very renegado; for there is no
Christian, that means to be saved by believing
rightly, can ever believe such impossible passages
of grossness. Hes in yellow stockings.
And cross-gartered?
Most villanously; like a pedant that keeps a school
i the church. I have dogged him, like his
murderer. He does obey every point of the letter
that I dropped to betray him: he does smile his
face into more lines than is in the new map with the
augmentation of the Indies: you have not seen such
a thing as tis. I can hardly forbear hurling things
at him. I know my lady will strike him: if she do,
hell smile and taket for a great favour.
Come, bring us, bring us where he is.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A street.
Enter SEBASTIAN and ANTONIO
I would not by my will have troubled you;
But, since you make your pleasure of your pains,
I will no further chide you.
I could not stay behind you: my desire,
More sharp than filed steel, did spur me forth;
And not all love to see you, though so much
As might have drawn one to a longer voyage,
But jealousy what might befall your travel,
Being skilless in these parts; which to a stranger,
Unguided and unfriended, often prove
Rough and unhospitable: my willing love,
The rather by these arguments of fear,
Set forth in your pursuit.
My kind Antonio,
I can no other answer make but thanks,
And thanks; and ever [         ] oft good turns
Are shuffled off with such uncurrent pay:
But, were my worth as is my conscience firm,
You should find better dealing. Whats to do?
Shall we go see the reliques of this town?
To-morrow, sir: best first go see your lodging.
I am not weary, and tis long to night:
I pray you, let us satisfy our eyes
With the memorials and the things of fame
That do renown this city.
Would yould pardon me;
I do not without danger walk these streets:
Once, in a sea-fight, gainst the count his galleys
I did some service; of such note indeed,
That were I taen here it would scarce be answerd.
Belike you slew great number of his people.
The offence is not of such a bloody nature;
Albeit the quality of the time and quarrel
Might well have given us bloody argument.
It might have since been answerd in repaying
What we took from them; which, for traffics sake,
Most of our city did: only myself stood out;
For which, if I be lapsed in this place,
I shall pay dear.
Do not then walk too open.
It doth not fit me. Hold, sir, heres my purse.
In the south suburbs, at the Elephant,
Is best to lodge: I will bespeak our diet,
Whiles you beguile the time and feed your knowledge
With viewing of the town: there shall you have me.
Why I your purse?
Haply your eye shall light upon some toy
You have desire to purchase; and your store,
I think, is not for idle markets, sir.
Ill be your purse-bearer and leave you
For an hour.
To the Elephant.
I do remember.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. OLIVIAs garden.
Enter OLIVIA and MARIA
I have sent after him: he says hell come;
How shall I feast him? what bestow of him?
For youth is bought more oft than beggd or borrowd.
I speak too loud.
Where is Malvolio? he is sad and civil,
And suits well for a servant with my fortunes:
Where is Malvolio?
Hes coming, madam; but in very strange manner. He
is, sure, possessed, madam.
Why, whats the matter? does he rave?
No. madam, he does nothing but smile: your
ladyship were best to have some guard about you, if
he come; for, sure, the man is tainted ins wits.
Go call him hither.
Exit MARIA
I am as mad as he,
If sad and merry madness equal be.
Re-enter MARIA, with MALVOLIO
How now, Malvolio!
Sweet lady, ho, ho.
Smilest thou?
I sent for thee upon a sad occasion.
Sad, lady! I could be sad: this does make some
obstruction in the blood, this cross-gartering; but
what of that? if it please the eye of one, it is
with me as the very true sonnet is, Please one, and
please all.
Why, how dost thou, man? what is the matter with thee?
Not black in my mind, though yellow in my legs. It
did come to his hands, and commands shall be
executed: I think we do know the sweet Roman hand.
Wilt thou go to bed, Malvolio?
To bed! ay, sweet-heart, and Ill come to thee.
God comfort thee! Why dost thou smile so and kiss
thy hand so oft?
How do you, Malvolio?
At your request! yes; nightingales answer daws.
Why appear you with this ridiculous boldness before my lady?
Be not afraid of greatness: twas well writ.
What meanest thou by that, Malvolio?
Some are born great,--
Ha!
Some achieve greatness,--
What sayest thou?
And some have greatness thrust upon them.
Heaven restore thee!
Remember who commended thy yellow stocking s,--
Thy yellow stockings!
And wished to see thee cross-gartered.
Cross-gartered!
Go to thou art made, if thou desirest to be so;--
Am I made?
If not, let me see thee a servant still.
Why, this is very midsummer madness.
Enter Servant
Madam, the young gentleman of the Count Orsinos is
returned: I could hardly entreat him back: he
attends your ladyships pleasure.
Ill come to him.
Exit Servant
Good Maria, let this fellow be looked to. Wheres
my cousin Toby? Let some of my people have a special
care of him: I would not have him miscarry for the
half of my dowry.
Exeunt OLIVIA and MARIA
O, ho! do you come near me now? no worse man than
Sir Toby to look to me! This concurs directly with
the letter: she sends him on purpose, that I may
appear stubborn to him; for she incites me to that
in the letter. Cast thy humble slough, says she;
be opposite with a kinsman, surly with servants;
let thy tongue tang with arguments of state; put
thyself into the trick of singularity; and
consequently sets down the manner how; as, a sad
face, a reverend carriage, a slow tongue, in the
habit of some sir of note, and so forth. I have
limed her; but it is Joves doing, and Jove make me
thankful! And when she went away now, Let this
fellow be looked to: fellow! not Malvolio, nor
after my degree, but fellow. Why, every thing
adheres together, that no dram of a scruple, no
scruple of a scruple, no obstacle, no incredulous
or unsafe circumstance--What can be said? Nothing
that can be can come between me and the full
prospect of my hopes. Well, Jove, not I, is the
doer of this, and he is to be thanked.
Re-enter MARIA, with SIR TOBY BELCH and FABIAN
Which way is he, in the name of sanctity? If all
the devils of hell be drawn in little, and Legion
himself possessed him, yet Ill speak to him.
Here he is, here he is. How ist with you, sir?
how ist with you, man?
Go off; I discard you: let me enjoy my private: go
off.
Lo, how hollow the fiend speaks within him! did not
I tell you? Sir Toby, my lady prays you to have a
care of him.
Ah, ha! does she so?
Go to, go to; peace, peace; we must deal gently
with him: let me alone. How do you, Malvolio? how
ist with you? What, man! defy the devil:
consider, hes an enemy to mankind.
Do you know what you say?
La you, an you speak ill of the devil, how he takes
it at heart! Pray God, he be not bewitched!
Carry his water to the wise woman.
Marry, and it shall be done to-morrow morning, if I
live. My lady would not lose him for more than Ill say.
How now, mistress!
O Lord!
Prithee, hold thy peace; this is not the way: do
you not see you move him? let me alone with him.
No way but gentleness; gently, gently: the fiend is
rough, and will not be roughly used.
Why, how now, my bawcock! how dost thou, chuck?
Sir!
Ay, Biddy, come with me. What, man! tis not for
gravity to play at cherry-pit with Satan: hang
him, foul collier!
Get him to say his prayers, good Sir Toby, get him to pray.
My prayers, minx!
No, I warrant you, he will not hear of godliness.
Go, hang yourselves all! you are idle shallow
things: I am not of your element: you shall know
more hereafter.
Exit
Ist possible?
If this were played upon a stage now, I could
condemn it as an improbable fiction.
His very genius hath taken the infection of the device, man.
Nay, pursue him now, lest the device take air and taint.
Why, we shall make him mad indeed.
The house will be the quieter.
Come, well have him in a dark room and bound. My
niece is already in the belief that hes mad: we
may carry it thus, for our pleasure and his penance,
till our very pastime, tired out of breath, prompt
us to have mercy on him: at which time we will
bring the device to the bar and crown thee for a
finder of madmen. But see, but see.
Enter SIR ANDREW
More matter for a May morning.
Heres the challenge, read it: warrant theres
vinegar and pepper int.
Ist so saucy?
Ay, ist, I warrant him: do but read.
Give me.
Reads
Youth, whatsoever thou art, thou art but a scurvy fellow.
Good, and valiant.
[Reads]  Wonder not, nor admire not in thy mind,
why I do call thee so, for I will show thee no reason fort.
A good note; that keeps you from the blow of the law.
[Reads]  Thou comest to the lady Olivia, and in my
sight she uses thee kindly: but thou liest in thy
throat; that is not the matter I challenge thee for.
Very brief, and to exceeding good sense--less.
[Reads]  I will waylay thee going home; where if it
be thy chance to kill me,--
Good.
[Reads]  Thou killest me like a rogue and a villain.
Still you keep o the windy side of the law: good.
[Reads]  Fare thee well; and God have mercy upon
one of our souls! He may have mercy upon mine; but
my hope is better, and so look to thyself. Thy
friend, as thou usest him, and thy sworn enemy,
ANDREW AGUECHEEK.
If this letter move him not, his legs cannot:
Ill givet him.
You may have very fit occasion fort: he is now in
some commerce with my lady, and will by and by depart.
Go, Sir Andrew: scout me for him at the corner the
orchard like a bum-baily: so soon as ever thou seest
him, draw; and, as thou drawest swear horrible; for
it comes to pass oft that a terrible oath, with a
swaggering accent sharply twanged off, gives manhood
more approbation than ever proof itself would have
earned him. Away!
Nay, let me alone for swearing.
Exit
Now will not I deliver his letter: for the behavior
of the young gentleman gives him out to be of good
capacity and breeding; his employment between his
lord and my niece confirms no less: therefore this
letter, being so excellently ignorant, will breed no
terror in the youth: he will find it comes from a
clodpole. But, sir, I will deliver his challenge by
word of mouth; set upon Aguecheek a notable report
of valour; and drive the gentleman, as I know his
youth will aptly receive it, into a most hideous
opinion of his rage, skill, fury and impetuosity.
This will so fright them both that they will kill
one another by the look, like cockatrices.
Re-enter OLIVIA, with VIOLA
Here he comes with your niece: give them way till
he take leave, and presently after him.
I will meditate the while upon some horrid message
for a challenge.
Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH, FABIAN, and MARIA
I have said too much unto a heart of stone
And laid mine honour too unchary out:
Theres something in me that reproves my fault;
But such a headstrong potent fault it is,
That it but mocks reproof.
With the same havior that your passion bears
Goes on my masters grief.
Here, wear this jewel for me, tis my picture;
Refuse it not; it hath no tongue to vex you;
And I beseech you come again to-morrow.
What shall you ask of me that Ill deny,
That honour saved may upon asking give?
Nothing but this; your true love for my master.
How with mine honour may I give him that
Which I have given to you?
I will acquit you.
Well, come again to-morrow: fare thee well:
A fiend like thee might bear my soul to hell.
Exit
Re-enter SIR TOBY BELCH and FABIAN
Gentleman, God save thee.
And you, sir.
That defence thou hast, betake thee tot: of what
nature the wrongs are thou hast done him, I know
not; but thy intercepter, full of despite, bloody as
the hunter, attends thee at the orchard-end:
dismount thy tuck, be yare in thy preparation, for
thy assailant is quick, skilful and deadly.
You mistake, sir; I am sure no man hath any quarrel
to me: my remembrance is very free and clear from
any image of offence done to any man.
Youll find it otherwise, I assure you: therefore,
if you hold your life at any price, betake you to
your guard; for your opposite hath in him what
youth, strength, skill and wrath can furnish man withal.
I pray you, sir, what is he?
He is knight, dubbed with unhatched rapier and on
carpet consideration; but he is a devil in private
brawl: souls and bodies hath he divorced three; and
his incensement at this moment is so implacable,
that satisfaction can be none but by pangs of death
and sepulchre. Hob, nob, is his word; givet or taket.
I will return again into the house and desire some
conduct of the lady. I am no fighter. I have heard
of some kind of men that put quarrels purposely on
others, to taste their valour: belike this is a man
of that quirk.
Sir, no; his indignation derives itself out of a
very competent injury: therefore, get you on and
give him his desire. Back you shall not to the
house, unless you undertake that with me which with
as much safety you might answer him: therefore, on,
or strip your sword stark naked; for meddle you
must, thats certain, or forswear to wear iron about you.
This is as uncivil as strange. I beseech you, do me
this courteous office, as to know of the knight what
my offence to him is: it is something of my
negligence, nothing of my purpose.
I will do so. Signior Fabian, stay you by this
gentleman till my return.
Exit
Pray you, sir, do you know of this matter?
I know the knight is incensed against you, even to a
mortal arbitrement; but nothing of the circumstance more.
I beseech you, what manner of man is he?
Nothing of that wonderful promise, to read him by
his form, as you are like to find him in the proof
of his valour. He is, indeed, sir, the most skilful,
bloody and fatal opposite that you could possibly
have found in any part of Illyria. Will you walk
towards him? I will make your peace with him if I
can.
I shall be much bound to you fort: I am one that
had rather go with sir priest than sir knight: I
care not who knows so much of my mettle.
Exeunt
Re-enter SIR TOBY BELCH, with SIR ANDREW
Why, man, hes a very devil; I have not seen such a
firago. I had a pass with him, rapier, scabbard and
all, and he gives me the stuck in with such a mortal
motion, that it is inevitable; and on the answer, he
pays you as surely as your feet hit the ground they
step on. They say he has been fencer to the Sophy.
Pox ont, Ill not meddle with him.
Ay, but he will not now be pacified: Fabian can
scarce hold him yonder.
Plague ont, an I thought he had been valiant and so
cunning in fence, Ild have seen him damned ere Ild
have challenged him. Let him let the matter slip,
and Ill give him my horse, grey Capilet.
Ill make the motion: stand here, make a good show
ont: this shall end without the perdition of souls.
Aside
Marry, Ill ride your horse as well as I ride you.
Re-enter FABIAN and VIOLA
To FABIAN
I have his horse to take up the quarrel:
I have persuaded him the youths a devil.
He is as horribly conceited of him; and pants and
looks pale, as if a bear were at his heels.
[To VIOLA]  Theres no remedy, sir; he will fight
with you fors oath sake: marry, he hath better
bethought him of his quarrel, and he finds that now
scarce to be worth talking of: therefore draw, for
the supportance of his vow; he protests he will not hurt you.
[Aside]  Pray God defend me! A little thing would
make me tell them how much I lack of a man.
Give ground, if you see him furious.
Come, Sir Andrew, theres no remedy; the gentleman
will, for his honours sake, have one bout with you;
he cannot by the duello avoid it: but he has
promised me, as he is a gentleman and a soldier, he
will not hurt you. Come on; tot.
Pray God, he keep his oath!
I do assure you, tis against my will.
They draw
Enter ANTONIO
Put up your sword. If this young gentleman
Have done offence, I take the fault on me:
If you offend him, I for him defy you.
You, sir! why, what are you?
One, sir, that for his love dares yet do more
Than you have heard him brag to you he will.
Nay, if you be an undertaker, I am for you.
They draw
Enter Officers
O good Sir Toby, hold! here come the officers.
Ill be with you anon.
Pray, sir, put your sword up, if you please.
Marry, will I, sir; and, for that I promised you,
Ill be as good as my word: he will bear you easily
and reins well.
This is the man; do thy office.
Antonio, I arrest thee at the suit of Count Orsino.
You do mistake me, sir.
No, sir, no jot; I know your favour well,
Though now you have no sea-cap on your head.
Take him away: he knows I know him well.
I must obey.
To VIOLA
This comes with seeking you:
But theres no remedy; I shall answer it.
What will you do, now my necessity
Makes me to ask you for my purse? It grieves me
Much more for what I cannot do for you
Than what befalls myself. You stand amazed;
But be of comfort.
Come, sir, away.
I must entreat of you some of that money.
What money, sir?
For the fair kindness you have showd me here,
And, part, being prompted by your present trouble,
Out of my lean and low ability
Ill lend you something: my having is not much;
Ill make division of my present with you:
Hold, theres half my coffer.
Will you deny me now?
Ist possible that my deserts to you
Can lack persuasion? Do not tempt my misery,
Lest that it make me so unsound a man
As to upbraid you with those kindnesses
That I have done for you.
I know of none;
Nor know I you by voice or any feature:
I hate ingratitude more in a man
Than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenness,
Or any taint of vice whose strong corruption
Inhabits our frail blood.
O heavens themselves!
Come, sir, I pray you, go.
Let me speak a little. This youth that you see here
I snatchd one half out of the jaws of death,
Relieved him with such sanctity of love,
And to his image, which methought did promise
Most venerable worth, did I devotion.
Whats that to us? The time goes by: away!
But O how vile an idol proves this god
Thou hast, Sebastian, done good feature shame.
In nature theres no blemish but the mind;
None can be calld deformd but the unkind:
Virtue is beauty, but the beauteous evil
Are empty trunks oerflourishd by the devil.
The man grows mad: away with him! Come, come, sir.
Lead me on.
Exit with Officers
Methinks his words do from such passion fly,
That he believes himself: so do not I.
Prove true, imagination, O, prove true,
That I, dear brother, be now taen for you!
Come hither, knight; come hither, Fabian: well
whisper oer a couplet or two of most sage saws.
He named Sebastian: I my brother know
Yet living in my glass; even such and so
In favour was my brother, and he went
Still in this fashion, colour, ornament,
For him I imitate: O, if it prove,
Tempests are kind and salt waves fresh in love.
Exit
A very dishonest paltry boy, and more a coward than
a hare: his dishonesty appears in leaving his
friend here in necessity and denying him; and for
his cowardship, ask Fabian.
A coward, a most devout coward, religious in it.
Slid, Ill after him again and beat him.
Do; cuff him soundly, but never draw thy sword.
An I do not,--
Come, lets see the event.
I dare lay any money twill be nothing yet.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Before OLIVIAs house.
Enter SEBASTIAN and Clown
Will you make me believe that I am not sent for you?
Go to, go to, thou art a foolish fellow:
Let me be clear of thee.
Well held out, i faith! No, I do not know you; nor
I am not sent to you by my lady, to bid you come
speak with her; nor your name is not Master Cesario;
nor this is not my nose neither. Nothing that is so is so.
I prithee, vent thy folly somewhere else: Thou
knowst not me.
Vent my folly! he has heard that word of some
great man and now applies it to a fool. Vent my
folly! I am afraid this great lubber, the world,
will prove a cockney. I prithee now, ungird thy
strangeness and tell me what I shall vent to my
lady: shall I vent to her that thou art coming?
I prithee, foolish Greek, depart from me: Theres
money for thee: if you tarry longer, I shall give
worse payment.
By my troth, thou hast an open hand. These wise men
that give fools money get themselves a good
report--after fourteen years purchase.
Enter SIR ANDREW, SIR TOBY BELCH, and FABIAN
Now, sir, have I met you again? theres for you.
Why, theres for thee, and there, and there. Are all
the people mad?
Hold, sir, or Ill throw your dagger oer the house.
This will I tell my lady straight: I would not be
in some of your coats for two pence.
Exit
Come on, sir; hold.
Nay, let him alone: Ill go another way to work
with him; Ill have an action of battery against
him, if there be any law in Illyria: though I
struck him first, yet its no matter for that.
Let go thy hand.
Come, sir, I will not let you go. Come, my young
soldier, put up your iron: you are well fleshed; come on.
I will be free from thee. What wouldst thou now? If
thou darest tempt me further, draw thy sword.
What, what? Nay, then I must have an ounce or two
of this malapert blood from you.
Enter OLIVIA
Hold, Toby; on thy life I charge thee, hold!
Madam!
Will it be ever thus? Ungracious wretch,
Fit for the mountains and the barbarous caves,
Where manners neer were preachd! out of my sight!
Be not offended, dear Cesario.
Rudesby, be gone!
Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH, SIR ANDREW, and FABIAN
I prithee, gentle friend,
Let thy fair wisdom, not thy passion, sway
In this uncivil and thou unjust extent
Against thy peace. Go with me to my house,
And hear thou there how many fruitless pranks
This ruffian hath botchd up, that thou thereby
Mayst smile at this: thou shalt not choose but go:
Do not deny. Beshrew his soul for me,
He started one poor heart of mine in thee.
What relish is in this? how runs the stream?
Or I am mad, or else this is a dream:
Let fancy still my sense in Lethe steep;
If it be thus to dream, still let me sleep!
Nay, come, I prithee; would thouldst be ruled by me!
Madam, I will.
O, say so, and so be!
Exeunt
SCENE II. OLIVIAs house.
Enter MARIA and Clown
Nay, I prithee, put on this gown and this beard;
make him believe thou art Sir Topas the curate: do
it quickly; Ill call Sir Toby the whilst.
Exit
Well, Ill put it on, and I will dissemble myself
int; and I would I were the first that ever
dissembled in such a gown. I am not tall enough to
become the function well, nor lean enough to be
thought a good student; but to be said an honest man
and a good housekeeper goes as fairly as to say a
careful man and a great scholar. The competitors enter.
Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and MARIA
Jove bless thee, master Parson.
Bonos dies, Sir Toby: for, as the old hermit of
Prague, that never saw pen and ink, very wittily
said to a niece of King Gorboduc, That that is is;
so I, being Master Parson, am Master Parson; for,
what is that but that, and is but is?
To him, Sir Topas.
What, ho, I say! peace in this prison!
The knave counterfeits well; a good knave.
[Within]  Who calls there?
Sir Topas the curate, who comes to visit Malvolio
the lunatic.
Sir Topas, Sir Topas, good Sir Topas, go to my lady.
Out, hyperbolical fiend! how vexest thou this man!
talkest thou nothing but of ladies?
Well said, Master Parson.
Sir Topas, never was man thus wronged: good Sir
Topas, do not think I am mad: they have laid me
here in hideous darkness.
Fie, thou dishonest Satan! I call thee by the most
modest terms; for I am one of those gentle ones
that will use the devil himself with courtesy:
sayest thou that house is dark?
As hell, Sir Topas.
Why it hath bay windows transparent as barricadoes,
and the clearstores toward the south north are as
lustrous as ebony; and yet complainest thou of
obstruction?
I am not mad, Sir Topas: I say to you, this house is dark.
Madman, thou errest: I say, there is no darkness
but ignorance; in which thou art more puzzled than
the Egyptians in their fog.
I say, this house is as dark as ignorance, though
ignorance were as dark as hell; and I say, there
was never man thus abused. I am no more mad than you
are: make the trial of it in any constant question.
What is the opinion of Pythagoras concerning wild fowl?
That the soul of our grandam might haply inhabit a bird.
What thinkest thou of his opinion?
I think nobly of the soul, and no way approve his opinion.
Fare thee well. Remain thou still in darkness:
thou shalt hold the opinion of Pythagoras ere I will
allow of thy wits, and fear to kill a woodcock, lest
thou dispossess the soul of thy grandam. Fare thee well.
Sir Topas, Sir Topas!
