My most exquisite Sir Topas!
Nay, I am for all waters.
Thou mightst have done this without thy beard and
gown: he sees thee not.
To him in thine own voice, and bring me word how
thou findest him: I would we were well rid of this
knavery. If he may be conveniently delivered, I
would he were, for I am now so far in offence with
my niece that I cannot pursue with any safety this
sport to the upshot. Come by and by to my chamber.
Exeunt SIR TOBY BELCH and MARIA
[Singing]
Hey, Robin, jolly Robin,
Tell me how thy lady does.
Fool!
My lady is unkind, perdy.
Fool!
Alas, why is she so?
Fool, I say!
She loves another--Who calls, ha?
Good fool, as ever thou wilt deserve well at my
hand, help me to a candle, and pen, ink and paper:
as I am a gentleman, I will live to be thankful to
thee fort.
Master Malvolio?
Ay, good fool.
Alas, sir, how fell you besides your five wits?
Fool, there was never a man so notoriously abused: I
am as well in my wits, fool, as thou art.
But as well? then you are mad indeed, if you be no
better in your wits than a fool.
They have here propertied me; keep me in darkness,
send ministers to me, asses, and do all they can to
face me out of my wits.
Advise you what you say; the minister is here.
Malvolio, Malvolio, thy wits the heavens restore!
endeavour thyself to sleep, and leave thy vain
bibble babble.
Sir Topas!
Maintain no words with him, good fellow. Who, I,
sir? not I, sir. God be wi you, good Sir Topas.
Merry, amen. I will, sir, I will.
Fool, fool, fool, I say!
Alas, sir, be patient. What say you sir? I am
shent for speaking to you.
Good fool, help me to some light and some paper: I
tell thee, I am as well in my wits as any man in Illyria.
Well-a-day that you were, sir
By this hand, I am. Good fool, some ink, paper and
light; and convey what I will set down to my lady:
it shall advantage thee more than ever the bearing
of letter did.
I will help you tot. But tell me true, are you
not mad indeed? or do you but counterfeit?
Believe me, I am not; I tell thee true.
Nay, Ill neer believe a madman till I see his
brains. I will fetch you light and paper and ink.
Fool, Ill requite it in the highest degree: I
prithee, be gone.
[Singing]
I am gone, sir,
And anon, sir,
Ill be with you again,
In a trice,
Like to the old Vice,
Your need to sustain;
Who, with dagger of lath,
In his rage and his wrath,
Cries, ah, ha! to the devil:
Like a mad lad,
Pare thy nails, dad;
Adieu, good man devil.
Exit
SCENE III. OLIVIAs garden.
Enter SEBASTIAN
This is the air; that is the glorious sun;
This pearl she gave me, I do feelt and seet;
And though tis wonder that enwraps me thus,
Yet tis not madness. Wheres Antonio, then?
I could not find him at the Elephant:
Yet there he was; and there I found this credit,
That he did range the town to seek me out.
His counsel now might do me golden service;
For though my soul disputes well with my sense,
That this may be some error, but no madness,
Yet doth this accident and flood of fortune
So far exceed all instance, all discourse,
That I am ready to distrust mine eyes
And wrangle with my reason that persuades me
To any other trust but that I am mad
Or else the ladys mad; yet, if twere so,
She could not sway her house, command her followers,
Take and give back affairs and their dispatch
With such a smooth, discreet and stable bearing
As I perceive she does: theres something int
That is deceiveable. But here the lady comes.
Enter OLIVIA and Priest
Blame not this haste of mine. If you mean well,
Now go with me and with this holy man
Into the chantry by: there, before him,
And underneath that consecrated roof,
Plight me the full assurance of your faith;
That my most jealous and too doubtful soul
May live at peace. He shall conceal it
Whiles you are willing it shall come to note,
What time we will our celebration keep
According to my birth. What do you say?
Ill follow this good man, and go with you;
And, having sworn truth, ever will be true.
Then lead the way, good father; and heavens so shine,
That they may fairly note this act of mine!
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Before OLIVIAs house.
Enter Clown and FABIAN
Now, as thou lovest me, let me see his letter.
Good Master Fabian, grant me another request.
Any thing.
Do not desire to see this letter.
This is, to give a dog, and in recompense desire my
dog again.
Enter DUKE ORSINO, VIOLA, CURIO, and Lords
Belong you to the Lady Olivia, friends?
Ay, sir; we are some of her trappings.
I know thee well; how dost thou, my good fellow?
Truly, sir, the better for my foes and the worse
for my friends.
Just the contrary; the better for thy friends.
No, sir, the worse.
How can that be?
Marry, sir, they praise me and make an ass of me;
now my foes tell me plainly I am an ass: so that by
my foes, sir I profit in the knowledge of myself,
and by my friends, I am abused: so that,
conclusions to be as kisses, if your four negatives
make your two affirmatives why then, the worse for
my friends and the better for my foes.
Why, this is excellent.
By my troth, sir, no; though it please you to be
one of my friends.
Thou shalt not be the worse for me: theres gold.
But that it would be double-dealing, sir, I would
you could make it another.
O, you give me ill counsel.
Put your grace in your pocket, sir, for this once,
and let your flesh and blood obey it.
Well, I will be so much a sinner, to be a
double-dealer: theres another.
Primo, secundo, tertio, is a good play; and the old
saying is, the third pays for all: the triplex,
sir, is a good tripping measure; or the bells of
Saint Bennet, sir, may put you in mind; one, two, three.
You can fool no more money out of me at this throw:
if you will let your lady know I am here to speak
with her, and bring her along with you, it may awake
my bounty further.
Marry, sir, lullaby to your bounty till I come
again. I go, sir; but I would not have you to think
that my desire of having is the sin of covetousness:
but, as you say, sir, let your bounty take a nap, I
will awake it anon.
Exit
Here comes the man, sir, that did rescue me.
Enter ANTONIO and Officers
That face of his I do remember well;
Yet, when I saw it last, it was besmeard
As black as Vulcan in the smoke of war:
A bawbling vessel was he captain of,
For shallow draught and bulk unprizable;
With which such scathful grapple did he make
With the most noble bottom of our fleet,
That very envy and the tongue of loss
Cried fame and honour on him. Whats the matter?
Orsino, this is that Antonio
That took the Phoenix and her fraught from Candy;
And this is he that did the Tiger board,
When your young nephew Titus lost his leg:
Here in the streets, desperate of shame and state,
In private brabble did we apprehend him.
He did me kindness, sir, drew on my side;
But in conclusion put strange speech upon me:
I know not what twas but distraction.
Notable pirate! thou salt-water thief!
What foolish boldness brought thee to their mercies,
Whom thou, in terms so bloody and so dear,
Hast made thine enemies?
Orsino, noble sir,
Be pleased that I shake off these names you give me:
Antonio never yet was thief or pirate,
Though I confess, on base and ground enough,
Orsinos enemy. A witchcraft drew me hither:
That most ingrateful boy there by your side,
From the rude seas enraged and foamy mouth
Did I redeem; a wreck past hope he was:
His life I gave him and did thereto add
My love, without retention or restraint,
All his in dedication; for his sake
Did I expose myself, pure for his love,
Into the danger of this adverse town;
Drew to defend him when he was beset:
Where being apprehended, his false cunning,
Not meaning to partake with me in danger,
Taught him to face me out of his acquaintance,
And grew a twenty years removed thing
While one would wink; denied me mine own purse,
Which I had recommended to his use
Not half an hour before.
How can this be?
When came he to this town?
To-day, my lord; and for three months before,
No interim, not a minutes vacancy,
Both day and night did we keep company.
Enter OLIVIA and Attendants
Here comes the countess: now heaven walks on earth.
But for thee, fellow; fellow, thy words are madness:
Three months this youth hath tended upon me;
But more of that anon. Take him aside.
What would my lord, but that he may not have,
Wherein Olivia may seem serviceable?
Cesario, you do not keep promise with me.
Madam!
Gracious Olivia,--
What do you say, Cesario? Good my lord,--
My lord would speak; my duty hushes me.
If it be aught to the old tune, my lord,
It is as fat and fulsome to mine ear
As howling after music.
Still so cruel?
Still so constant, lord.
What, to perverseness? you uncivil lady,
To whose ingrate and unauspicious altars
My soul the faithfullst offerings hath breathed out
That eer devotion tenderd! What shall I do?
Even what it please my lord, that shall become him.
Why should I not, had I the heart to do it,
Like to the Egyptian thief at point of death,
Kill what I love?--a savage jealousy
That sometimes savours nobly. But hear me this:
Since you to non-regardance cast my faith,
And that I partly know the instrument
That screws me from my true place in your favour,
Live you the marble-breasted tyrant still;
But this your minion, whom I know you love,
And whom, by heaven I swear, I tender dearly,
Him will I tear out of that cruel eye,
Where he sits crowned in his masters spite.
Come, boy, with me; my thoughts are ripe in mischief:
Ill sacrifice the lamb that I do love,
To spite a ravens heart within a dove.
And I, most jocund, apt and willingly,
To do you rest, a thousand deaths would die.
Where goes Cesario?
After him I love
More than I love these eyes, more than my life,
More, by all mores, than eer I shall love wife.
If I do feign, you witnesses above
Punish my life for tainting of my love!
Ay me, detested! how am I beguiled!
Who does beguile you? who does do you wrong?
Hast thou forgot thyself? is it so long?
Call forth the holy father.
Come, away!
Whither, my lord? Cesario, husband, stay.
Husband!
Ay, husband: can he that deny?
Her husband, sirrah!
No, my lord, not I.
Alas, it is the baseness of thy fear
That makes thee strangle thy propriety:
Fear not, Cesario; take thy fortunes up;
Be that thou knowst thou art, and then thou art
As great as that thou fearst.
Enter Priest
O, welcome, father!
Father, I charge thee, by thy reverence,
Here to unfold, though lately we intended
To keep in darkness what occasion now
Reveals before tis ripe, what thou dost know
Hath newly passd between this youth and me.
A contract of eternal bond of love,
Confirmd by mutual joinder of your hands,
Attested by the holy close of lips,
Strengthend by interchangement of your rings;
And all the ceremony of this compact
Seald in my function, by my testimony:
Since when, my watch hath told me, toward my grave
I have travelld but two hours.
O thou dissembling cub! what wilt thou be
When time hath sowd a grizzle on thy case?
Or will not else thy craft so quickly grow,
That thine own trip shall be thine overthrow?
Farewell, and take her; but direct thy feet
Where thou and I henceforth may never meet.
My lord, I do protest--
O, do not swear!
Hold little faith, though thou hast too much fear.
Enter SIR ANDREW
For the love of God, a surgeon! Send one presently
to Sir Toby.
Whats the matter?
He has broke my head across and has given Sir Toby
a bloody coxcomb too: for the love of God, your
help! I had rather than forty pound I were at home.
Who has done this, Sir Andrew?
The counts gentleman, one Cesario: we took him for
a coward, but hes the very devil incardinate.
My gentleman, Cesario?
Ods lifelings, here he is! You broke my head for
nothing; and that that I did, I was set on to dot
by Sir Toby.
Why do you speak to me? I never hurt you:
You drew your sword upon me without cause;
But I bespoke you fair, and hurt you not.
If a bloody coxcomb be a hurt, you have hurt me: I
think you set nothing by a bloody coxcomb.
Enter SIR TOBY BELCH and Clown
Here comes Sir Toby halting; you shall hear more:
but if he had not been in drink, he would have
tickled you othergates than he did.
How now, gentleman! how ist with you?
Thats all one: has hurt me, and theres the end
ont. Sot, didst see Dick surgeon, sot?
O, hes drunk, Sir Toby, an hour agone; his eyes
were set at eight i the morning.
Then hes a rogue, and a passy measures panyn: I
hate a drunken rogue.
Away with him! Who hath made this havoc with them?
Ill help you, Sir Toby, because well be dressed together.
Will you help? an ass-head and a coxcomb and a
knave, a thin-faced knave, a gull!
Get him to bed, and let his hurt be lookd to.
Exeunt Clown, FABIAN, SIR TOBY BELCH, and SIR ANDREW
Enter SEBASTIAN
I am sorry, madam, I have hurt your kinsman:
But, had it been the brother of my blood,
I must have done no less with wit and safety.
You throw a strange regard upon me, and by that
I do perceive it hath offended you:
Pardon me, sweet one, even for the vows
We made each other but so late ago.
One face, one voice, one habit, and two persons,
A natural perspective, that is and is not!
Antonio, O my dear Antonio!
How have the hours rackd and tortured me,
Since I have lost thee!
Sebastian are you?
Fearst thou that, Antonio?
How have you made division of yourself?
An apple, cleft in two, is not more twin
Than these two creatures. Which is Sebastian?
Most wonderful!
Do I stand there? I never had a brother;
Nor can there be that deity in my nature,
Of here and every where. I had a sister,
Whom the blind waves and surges have devourd.
Of charity, what kin are you to me?
What countryman? what name? what parentage?
Of Messaline: Sebastian was my father;
Such a Sebastian was my brother too,
So went he suited to his watery tomb:
If spirits can assume both form and suit
You come to fright us.
A spirit I am indeed;
But am in that dimension grossly clad
Which from the womb I did participate.
Were you a woman, as the rest goes even,
I should my tears let fall upon your cheek,
And say Thrice-welcome, drowned Viola!
My father had a mole upon his brow.
And so had mine.
And died that day when Viola from her birth
Had numberd thirteen years.
O, that record is lively in my soul!
He finished indeed his mortal act
That day that made my sister thirteen years.
If nothing lets to make us happy both
But this my masculine usurpd attire,
Do not embrace me till each circumstance
Of place, time, fortune, do cohere and jump
That I am Viola: which to confirm,
Ill bring you to a captain in this town,
Where lie my maiden weeds; by whose gentle help
I was preserved to serve this noble count.
All the occurrence of my fortune since
Hath been between this lady and this lord.
[To OLIVIA]  So comes it, lady, you have been mistook:
But nature to her bias drew in that.
You would have been contracted to a maid;
Nor are you therein, by my life, deceived,
You are betrothd both to a maid and man.
Be not amazed; right noble is his blood.
If this be so, as yet the glass seems true,
I shall have share in this most happy wreck.
To VIOLA
Boy, thou hast said to me a thousand times
Thou never shouldst love woman like to me.
And all those sayings will I overswear;
And those swearings keep as true in soul
As doth that orbed continent the fire
That severs day from night.
Give me thy hand;
And let me see thee in thy womans weeds.
The captain that did bring me first on shore
Hath my maids garments: he upon some action
Is now in durance, at Malvolios suit,
A gentleman, and follower of my ladys.
He shall enlarge him: fetch Malvolio hither:
And yet, alas, now I remember me,
They say, poor gentleman, hes much distract.
Re-enter Clown with a letter, and FABIAN
A most extracting frenzy of mine own
From my remembrance clearly banishd his.
How does he, sirrah?
Truly, madam, he holds Belzebub at the stavess end as
well as a man in his case may do: has here writ a
letter to you; I should have givent you to-day
morning, but as a madmans epistles are no gospels,
so it skills not much when they are delivered.
Opent, and read it.
Look then to be well edified when the fool delivers
the madman.
Reads
By the Lord, madam,--
How now! art thou mad?
No, madam, I do but read madness: an your ladyship
will have it as it ought to be, you must allow Vox.
Prithee, read i thy right wits.
So I do, madonna; but to read his right wits is to
read thus: therefore perpend, my princess, and give ear.
Read it you, sirrah.
To FABIAN
[Reads]  By the Lord, madam, you wrong me, and the
world shall know it: though you have put me into
darkness and given your drunken cousin rule over
me, yet have I the benefit of my senses as well as
your ladyship. I have your own letter that induced
me to the semblance I put on; with the which I doubt
not but to do myself much right, or you much shame.
Think of me as you please. I leave my duty a little
unthought of and speak out of my injury.
THE MADLY-USED MALVOLIO.
Did he write this?
Ay, madam.
This savours not much of distraction.
See him deliverd, Fabian; bring him hither.
Exit FABIAN
My lord so please you, these things further
thought on,
To think me as well a sister as a wife,
One day shall crown the alliance ont, so please you,
Here at my house and at my proper cost.
Madam, I am most apt to embrace your offer.
To VIOLA
Your master quits you; and for your service done him,
So much against the mettle of your sex,
So far beneath your soft and tender breeding,
And since you calld me master for so long,
Here is my hand: you shall from this time be
Your masters mistress.
A sister! you are she.
Re-enter FABIAN, with MALVOLIO
Is this the madman?
Ay, my lord, this same.
How now, Malvolio!
Madam, you have done me wrong,
Notorious wrong.
Have I, Malvolio? no.
Lady, you have. Pray you, peruse that letter.
You must not now deny it is your hand:
Write from it, if you can, in hand or phrase;
Or say tis not your seal, nor your invention:
You can say none of this: well, grant it then
And tell me, in the modesty of honour,
Why you have given me such clear lights of favour,
Bade me come smiling and cross-garterd to you,
To put on yellow stockings and to frown
Upon Sir Toby and the lighter people;
And, acting this in an obedient hope,
Why have you sufferd me to be imprisond,
Kept in a dark house, visited by the priest,
And made the most notorious geck and gull
That eer invention playd on? tell me why.
Alas, Malvolio, this is not my writing,
Though, I confess, much like the character
But out of question tis Marias hand.
And now I do bethink me, it was she
First told me thou wast mad; then camest in smiling,
And in such forms which here were presupposed
Upon thee in the letter. Prithee, be content:
This practise hath most shrewdly passd upon thee;
But when we know the grounds and authors of it,
Thou shalt be both the plaintiff and the judge
Of thine own cause.
Good madam, hear me speak,
And let no quarrel nor no brawl to come
Taint the condition of this present hour,
Which I have wonderd at. In hope it shall not,
Most freely I confess, myself and Toby
Set this device against Malvolio here,
Upon some stubborn and uncourteous parts
We had conceived against him: Maria writ
The letter at Sir Tobys great importance;
In recompense whereof he hath married her.
How with a sportful malice it was followd,
May rather pluck on laughter than revenge;
If that the injuries be justly weighd
That have on both sides passd.
Alas, poor fool, how have they baffled thee!
Why, some are born great, some achieve greatness,
and some have greatness thrown upon them. I was
one, sir, in this interlude; one Sir Topas, sir; but
thats all one. By the Lord, fool, I am not mad.
But do you remember? Madam, why laugh you at such
a barren rascal? an you smile not, hes gagged:
and thus the whirligig of time brings in his revenges.
Ill be revenged on the whole pack of you.
Exit
He hath been most notoriously abused.
Pursue him and entreat him to a peace:
He hath not told us of the captain yet:
When that is known and golden time convents,
A solemn combination shall be made
Of our dear souls. Meantime, sweet sister,
We will not part from hence. Cesario, come;
For so you shall be, while you are a man;
But when in other habits you are seen,
Orsinos mistress and his fancys queen.
Exeunt all, except Clown
[Sings]
When that I was and a little tiny boy,
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
A foolish thing was but a toy,
For the rain it raineth every day.
But when I came to mans estate,
With hey, ho,  and c.
Gainst knaves and thieves men shut their gate,
For the rain,  and c.
But when I came, alas! to wive,
With hey, ho,  and c.
By swaggering could I never thrive,
For the rain,  and c.
But when I came unto my beds,
With hey, ho,  and c.
With toss-pots still had drunken heads,
For the rain,  and c.
A great while ago the world begun,
With hey, ho,  and c.
But thats all one, our play is done,
And well strive to please you every day.
Exit
ACT I
SCENE I. Verona. An open place.
Enter VALENTINE and PROTEUS
Cease to persuade, my loving Proteus:
Home-keeping youth have ever homely wits.
Weret not affection chains thy tender days
To the sweet glances of thy honourd love,
I rather would entreat thy company
To see the wonders of the world abroad,
Than, living dully sluggardized at home,
Wear out thy youth with shapeless idleness.
But since thou lovest, love still and thrive therein,
Even as I would when I to love begin.
Wilt thou be gone? Sweet Valentine, adieu!
Think on thy Proteus, when thou haply seest
Some rare note-worthy object in thy travel:
Wish me partaker in thy happiness
When thou dost meet good hap; and in thy danger,
If ever danger do environ thee,
Commend thy grievance to my holy prayers,
For I will be thy beadsman, Valentine.
And on a love-book pray for my success?
Upon some book I love Ill pray for thee.
Thats on some shallow story of deep love:
How young Leander crossd the Hellespont.
Thats a deep story of a deeper love:
For he was more than over shoes in love.
Tis true; for you are over boots in love,
And yet you never swum the Hellespont.
Over the boots? nay, give me not the boots.
No, I will not, for it boots thee not.
What?
To be in love, where scorn is bought with groans;
Coy looks with heart-sore sighs; one fading moments mirth
With twenty watchful, weary, tedious nights:
If haply won, perhaps a hapless gain;
If lost, why then a grievous labour won;
However, but a folly bought with wit,
Or else a wit by folly vanquished.
So, by your circumstance, you call me fool.
So, by your circumstance, I fear youll prove.
Tis love you cavil at: I am not Love.
Love is your master, for he masters you:
And he that is so yoked by a fool,
Methinks, should not be chronicled for wise.
Yet writers say, as in the sweetest bud
The eating canker dwells, so eating love
Inhabits in the finest wits of all.
And writers say, as the most forward bud
Is eaten by the canker ere it blow,
Even so by love the young and tender wit
Is turnd to folly, blasting in the bud,
Losing his verdure even in the prime
And all the fair effects of future hopes.
But wherefore waste I time to counsel thee,
That art a votary to fond desire?
Once more adieu! my father at the road
Expects my coming, there to see me shippd.
And thither will I bring thee, Valentine.
Sweet Proteus, no; now let us take our leave.
To Milan let me hear from thee by letters
Of thy success in love, and what news else
Betideth here in absence of thy friend;
And likewise will visit thee with mine.
All happiness bechance to thee in Milan!
As much to you at home! and so, farewell.
Exit
He after honour hunts, I after love:
He leaves his friends to dignify them more,
I leave myself, my friends and all, for love.
Thou, Julia, thou hast metamorphosed me,
Made me neglect my studies, lose my time,
War with good counsel, set the world at nought;
Made wit with musing weak, heart sick with thought.
Enter SPEED
Sir Proteus, save you! Saw you my master?
But now he parted hence, to embark for Milan.
Twenty to one then he is shippd already,
And I have playd the sheep in losing him.
Indeed, a sheep doth very often stray,
An if the shepherd be a while away.
You conclude that my master is a shepherd, then,
and I a sheep?
I do.
Why then, my horns are his horns, whether I wake or sleep.
A silly answer and fitting well a sheep.
This proves me still a sheep.
True; and thy master a shepherd.
Nay, that I can deny by a circumstance.
It shall go hard but Ill prove it by another.
The shepherd seeks the sheep, and not the sheep the
shepherd; but I seek my master, and my master seeks
not me: therefore I am no sheep.
The sheep for fodder follow the shepherd; the
shepherd for food follows not the sheep: thou for
wages followest thy master; thy master for wages
follows not thee: therefore thou art a sheep.
Such another proof will make me cry baa.
But, dost thou hear? gavest thou my letter to Julia?
Ay sir: I, a lost mutton, gave your letter to her,
a laced mutton, and she, a laced mutton, gave me, a
lost mutton, nothing for my labour.
Heres too small a pasture for such store of muttons.
If the ground be overcharged, you were best stick her.
Nay: in that you are astray, twere best pound you.
Nay, sir, less than a pound shall serve me for
carrying your letter.
You mistake; I mean the pound,--a pinfold.
From a pound to a pin? fold it over and over,
Tis threefold too little for carrying a letter to
your lover.
But what said she?
[First nodding]  Ay.
Nod--Ay--why, thats noddy.
You mistook, sir; I say, she did nod: and you ask
me if she did nod; and I say, Ay.
And that set together is noddy.
Now you have taken the pains to set it together,
take it for your pains.
No, no; you shall have it for bearing the letter.
Well, I perceive I must be fain to bear with you.
Why sir, how do you bear with me?
Marry, sir, the letter, very orderly; having nothing
but the word noddy for my pains.
Beshrew me, but you have a quick wit.
And yet it cannot overtake your slow purse.
Come come, open the matter in brief: what said she?
Open your purse, that the money and the matter may
be both at once delivered.
Well, sir, here is for your pains. What said she?
Truly, sir, I think youll hardly win her.
Why, couldst thou perceive so much from her?
Sir, I could perceive nothing at all from her; no,
not so much as a ducat for delivering your letter:
and being so hard to me that brought your mind, I
fear shell prove as hard to you in telling your
mind. Give her no token but stones; for shes as
hard as steel.
What said she? nothing?
No, not so much as Take this for thy pains. To
testify your bounty, I thank you, you have testerned
me; in requital whereof, henceforth carry your
letters yourself: and so, sir, Ill commend you to my master.
Go, go, be gone, to save your ship from wreck,
Which cannot perish having thee aboard,
Being destined to a drier death on shore.
Exit SPEED
I must go send some better messenger:
I fear my Julia would not deign my lines,
Receiving them from such a worthless post.
Exit
SCENE II. The same. Garden of JULIAs house.
Enter JULlA and LUCETTA
But say, Lucetta, now we are alone,
Wouldst thou then counsel me to fall in love?
Ay, madam, so you stumble not unheedfully.
Of all the fair resort of gentlemen
That every day with parle encounter me,
In thy opinion which is worthiest love?
Please you repeat their names, Ill show my mind
According to my shallow simple skill.
What thinkst thou of the fair Sir Eglamour?
As of a knight well-spoken, neat and fine;
But, were I you, he never should be mine.
What thinkst thou of the rich Mercatio?
Well of his wealth; but of himself, so so.
What thinkst thou of the gentle Proteus?
Lord, Lord! to see what folly reigns in us!
How now! what means this passion at his name?
Pardon, dear madam: tis a passing shame
That I, unworthy body as I am,
Should censure thus on lovely gentlemen.
Why not on Proteus, as of all the rest?
Then thus: of many good I think him best.
Your reason?
I have no other, but a womans reason;
I think him so because I think him so.
And wouldst thou have me cast my love on him?
Ay, if you thought your love not cast away.
Why he, of all the rest, hath never moved me.
Yet he, of all the rest, I think, best loves ye.
His little speaking shows his love but small.
Fire thats closest kept burns most of all.
They do not love that do not show their love.
O, they love least that let men know their love.
I would I knew his mind.
Peruse this paper, madam.
To Julia. Say, from whom?
That the contents will show.
Say, say, who gave it thee?
Valentines page; and sent, I think, from Proteus.
He would have given it you; but I, being in the way,
Did in your name receive it: pardon the
fault I pray.
Now, by my modesty, a goodly broker!
Dare you presume to harbour wanton lines?
To whisper and conspire against my youth?
Now, trust me, tis an office of great worth
And you an officer fit for the place.
Or else return no more into my sight.
To plead for love deserves more fee than hate.
Will ye be gone?
That you may ruminate.
Exit
And yet I would I had oerlooked the letter:
It were a shame to call her back again
And pray her to a fault for which I chid her.
What a fool is she, that knows I am a maid,
And would not force the letter to my view!
Since maids, in modesty, say no to that
Which they would have the profferer construe ay.
Fie, fie, how wayward is this foolish love
That, like a testy babe, will scratch the nurse
And presently all humbled kiss the rod!
How churlishly I chid Lucetta hence,
When willingly I would have had her here!
How angerly I taught my brow to frown,
When inward joy enforced my heart to smile!
My penance is to call Lucetta back
And ask remission for my folly past.
What ho! Lucetta!
Re-enter LUCETTA
What would your ladyship?
Ist near dinner-time?
I would it were,
That you might kill your stomach on your meat
And not upon your maid.
What ist that you took up so gingerly?
Nothing.
Why didst thou stoop, then?
To take a paper up that I let fall.
And is that paper nothing?
Nothing concerning me.
Then let it lie for those that it concerns.
Madam, it will not lie where it concerns
Unless it have a false interpeter.
Some love of yours hath writ to you in rhyme.
That I might sing it, madam, to a tune.
Give me a note: your ladyship can set.
As little by such toys as may be possible.
Best sing it to the tune of Light o love.
It is too heavy for so light a tune.
Heavy! belike it hath some burden then?
Ay, and melodious were it, would you sing it.
And why not you?
I cannot reach so high.
Lets see your song. How now, minion!
Keep tune there still, so you will sing it out:
And yet methinks I do not like this tune.
You do not?
No, madam; it is too sharp.
You, minion, are too saucy.
Nay, now you are too flat
And mar the concord with too harsh a descant:
There wanteth but a mean to fill your song.
The mean is drownd with your unruly bass.
Indeed, I bid the base for Proteus.
This babble shall not henceforth trouble me.
Here is a coil with protestation!
Tears the letter
Go get you gone, and let the papers lie:
You would be fingering them, to anger me.
She makes it strange; but she would be best pleased
To be so angerd with another letter.
Exit
Nay, would I were so angerd with the same!
O hateful hands, to tear such loving words!
Injurious wasps, to feed on such sweet honey
And kill the bees that yield it with your stings!
Ill kiss each several paper for amends.
Look, here is writ kind Julia. Unkind Julia!
As in revenge of thy ingratitude,
I throw thy name against the bruising stones,
Trampling contemptuously on thy disdain.
And here is writ love-wounded Proteus.
Poor wounded name! my bosom as a bed
Shall lodge thee till thy wound be thoroughly heald;
And thus I search it with a sovereign kiss.
But twice or thrice was Proteus written down.
Be calm, good wind, blow not a word away
Till I have found each letter in the letter,
Except mine own name: that some whirlwind bear
Unto a ragged fearful-hanging rock
And throw it thence into the raging sea!
Lo, here in one line is his name twice writ,
Poor forlorn Proteus, passionate Proteus,
To the sweet Julia: that Ill tear away.
And yet I will not, sith so prettily
He couples it to his complaining names.
Thus will I fold them one on another:
Now kiss, embrace, contend, do what you will.
Re-enter LUCETTA
Madam,
Dinner is ready, and your father stays.
Well, let us go.
What, shall these papers lie like tell-tales here?
If you respect them, best to take them up.
Nay, I was taken up for laying them down:
Yet here they shall not lie, for catching cold.
I see you have a months mind to them.
Ay, madam, you may say what sights you see;
I see things too, although you judge I wink.
Come, come; willt please you go?
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. ANTONIOs house.
Enter ANTONIO and PANTHINO
Tell me, Panthino, what sad talk was that
Wherewith my brother held you in the cloister?
Twas of his nephew Proteus, your son.
Why, what of him?
He wonderd that your lordship
Would suffer him to spend his youth at home,
While other men, of slender reputation,
Put forth their sons to seek preferment out:
Some to the wars, to try their fortune there;
Some to discover islands far away;
Some to the studious universities.
For any or for all these exercises,
He said that Proteus your son was meet,
And did request me to importune you
To let him spend his time no more at home,
Which would be great impeachment to his age,
In having known no travel in his youth.
Nor needst thou much importune me to that
Whereon this month I have been hammering.
I have considerd well his loss of time
And how he cannot be a perfect man,
Not being tried and tutord in the world:
Experience is by industry achieved
And perfected by the swift course of time.
Then tell me, whither were I best to send him?
I think your lordship is not ignorant
How his companion, youthful Valentine,
Attends the emperor in his royal court.
I know it well.
Twere good, I think, your lordship sent him thither:
There shall he practise tilts and tournaments,
Hear sweet discourse, converse with noblemen.
And be in eye of every exercise
Worthy his youth and nobleness of birth.
I like thy counsel; well hast thou advised:
And that thou mayst perceive how well I like it,
The execution of it shall make known.
Even with the speediest expedition
I will dispatch him to the emperors court.
To-morrow, may it please you, Don Alphonso,
With other gentlemen of good esteem,
Are journeying to salute the emperor
And to commend their service to his will.
Good company; with them shall Proteus go:
And, in good time! now will we break with him.
Enter PROTEUS
Sweet love! sweet lines! sweet life!
Here is her hand, the agent of her heart;
Here is her oath for love, her honours pawn.
O, that our fathers would applaud our loves,
To seal our happiness with their consents!
O heavenly Julia!
How now! what letter are you reading there?
Mayt please your lordship, tis a word or two
Of commendations sent from Valentine,
Deliverd by a friend that came from him.
Lend me the letter; let me see what news.
There is no news, my lord, but that he writes
How happily he lives, how well beloved
And daily graced by the emperor;
Wishing me with him, partner of his fortune.
And how stand you affected to his wish?
As one relying on your lordships will
And not depending on his friendly wish.
My will is something sorted with his wish.
Muse not that I thus suddenly proceed;
For what I will, I will, and there an end.
I am resolved that thou shalt spend some time
With Valentinus in the emperors court:
What maintenance he from his friends receives,
Like exhibition thou shalt have from me.
To-morrow be in readiness to go:
Excuse it not, for I am peremptory.
My lord, I cannot be so soon provided:
Please you, deliberate a day or two.
Look, what thou wantst shall be sent after thee:
No more of stay! to-morrow thou must go.
Come on, Panthino: you shall be employd
To hasten on his expedition.
Exeunt ANTONIO and PANTHINO
Thus have I shunnd the fire for fear of burning,
And drenchd me in the sea, where I am drownd.
I feard to show my father Julias letter,
Lest he should take exceptions to my love;
And with the vantage of mine own excuse
Hath he excepted most against my love.
O, how this spring of love resembleth
The uncertain glory of an April day,
Which now shows all the beauty of the sun,
And by and by a cloud takes all away!
Re-enter PANTHINO
Sir Proteus, your father calls for you:
He is in haste; therefore, I pray you to go.
Why, this it is: my heart accords thereto,
And yet a thousand times it answers no.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Milan. The DUKEs palace.
Enter VALENTINE and SPEED
Sir, your glove.
Not mine; my gloves are on.
Why, then, this may be yours, for this is but one.
Ha! let me see: ay, give it me, its mine:
Sweet ornament that decks a thing divine!
Ah, Silvia, Silvia!
Madam Silvia! Madam Silvia!
How now, sirrah?
She is not within hearing, sir.
Why, sir, who bade you call her?
Your worship, sir; or else I mistook.
Well, youll still be too forward.
And yet I was last chidden for being too slow.
Go to, sir: tell me, do you know Madam Silvia?
She that your worship loves?
Why, how know you that I am in love?
Marry, by these special marks: first, you have
learned, like Sir Proteus, to wreathe your arms,
like a malecontent; to relish a love-song, like a
robin-redbreast; to walk alone, like one that had
the pestilence; to sigh, like a school-boy that had
lost his A B C; to weep, like a young wench that had
buried her grandam; to fast, like one that takes
diet; to watch like one that fears robbing; to
speak puling, like a beggar at Hallowmas. You were
wont, when you laughed, to crow like a cock; when you
walked, to walk like one of the lions; when you
fasted, it was presently after dinner; when you
looked sadly, it was for want of money: and now you
are metamorphosed with a mistress, that, when I look
on you, I can hardly think you my master.
Are all these things perceived in me?
They are all perceived without ye.
Without me? they cannot.
Without you? nay, thats certain, for, without you
were so simple, none else would: but you are so
without these follies, that these follies are within
you and shine through you like the water in an
urinal, that not an eye that sees you but is a
physician to comment on your malady.
But tell me, dost thou know my lady Silvia?
She that you gaze on so as she sits at supper?
Hast thou observed that? even she, I mean.
Why, sir, I know her not.
Dost thou know her by my gazing on her, and yet
