knowest her not?
Is she not hard-favoured, sir?
Not so fair, boy, as well-favoured.
Sir, I know that well enough.
What dost thou know?
That she is not so fair as, of you, well-favoured.
I mean that her beauty is exquisite, but her favour infinite.
Thats because the one is painted and the other out
of all count.
How painted? and how out of count?
Marry, sir, so painted, to make her fair, that no
man counts of her beauty.
How esteemest thou me? I account of her beauty.
You never saw her since she was deformed.
How long hath she been deformed?
Ever since you loved her.
I have loved her ever since I saw her; and still I
see her beautiful.
If you love her, you cannot see her.
Why?
Because Love is blind. O, that you had mine eyes;
or your own eyes had the lights they were wont to
have when you chid at Sir Proteus for going
ungartered!
What should I see then?
Your own present folly and her passing deformity:
for he, being in love, could not see to garter his
hose, and you, being in love, cannot see to put on your hose.
Belike, boy, then, you are in love; for last
morning you could not see to wipe my shoes.
True, sir; I was in love with my bed: I thank you,
you swinged me for my love, which makes me the
bolder to chide you for yours.
In conclusion, I stand affected to her.
I would you were set, so your affection would cease.
Last night she enjoined me to write some lines to
one she loves.
And have you?
I have.
Are they not lamely writ?
No, boy, but as well as I can do them. Peace!
here she comes.
[Aside]  O excellent motion! O exceeding puppet!
Now will he interpret to her.
Enter SILVIA
Madam and mistress, a thousand good-morrows.
[Aside]  O, give ye good even! heres a million of manners.
Sir Valentine and servant, to you two thousand.
[Aside]  He should give her interest and she gives it him.
As you enjoind me, I have writ your letter
Unto the secret nameless friend of yours;
Which I was much unwilling to proceed in
But for my duty to your ladyship.
I thank you gentle servant: tis very clerkly done.
Now trust me, madam, it came hardly off;
For being ignorant to whom it goes
I writ at random, very doubtfully.
Perchance you think too much of so much pains?
No, madam; so it stead you, I will write
Please you command, a thousand times as much; And yet--
A pretty period! Well, I guess the sequel;
And yet I will not name it; and yet I care not;
And yet take this again; and yet I thank you,
Meaning henceforth to trouble you no more.
[Aside]  And yet you will; and yet another yet.
What means your ladyship? do you not like it?
Yes, yes; the lines are very quaintly writ;
But since unwillingly, take them again.
Nay, take them.
Madam, they are for you.
Ay, ay: you writ them, sir, at my request;
But I will none of them; they are for you;
I would have had them writ more movingly.
Please you, Ill write your ladyship another.
And when its writ, for my sake read it over,
And if it please you, so; if not, why, so.
If it please me, madam, what then?
Why, if it please you, take it for your labour:
And so, good morrow, servant.
Exit
O jest unseen, inscrutable, invisible,
As a nose on a mans face, or a weathercock on a steeple!
My master sues to her, and she hath
taught her suitor,
He being her pupil, to become her tutor.
O excellent device! was there ever heard a better,
That my master, being scribe, to himself should write
the letter?
How now, sir? what are you reasoning with yourself?
Nay, I was rhyming: tis you that have the reason.
To do what?
To be a spokesman for Madam Silvia.
To whom?
To yourself: why, she wooes you by a figure.
What figure?
By a letter, I should say.
Why, she hath not writ to me?
What need she, when she hath made you write to
yourself? Why, do you not perceive the jest?
No, believe me.
No believing you, indeed, sir. But did you perceive
her earnest?
She gave me none, except an angry word.
Why, she hath given you a letter.
Thats the letter I writ to her friend.
And that letter hath she delivered, and there an end.
I would it were no worse.
Ill warrant you, tis as well:
For often have you writ to her, and she, in modesty,
Or else for want of idle time, could not again reply;
Or fearing else some messenger that might her mind discover,
Herself hath taught her love himself to write unto her lover.
All this I speak in print, for in print I found it.
Why muse you, sir? tis dinner-time.
I have dined.
Ay, but hearken, sir; though the chameleon Love can
feed on the air, I am one that am nourished by my
victuals, and would fain have meat. O, be not like
your mistress; be moved, be moved.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Verona. JULIAS house.
Enter PROTEUS and JULIA
Have patience, gentle Julia.
I must, where is no remedy.
When possibly I can, I will return.
If you turn not, you will return the sooner.
Keep this remembrance for thy Julias sake.
Giving a ring
Why then, well make exchange; here, take you this.
And seal the bargain with a holy kiss.
Here is my hand for my true constancy;
And when that hour oerslips me in the day
Wherein I sigh not, Julia, for thy sake,
The next ensuing hour some foul mischance
Torment me for my loves forgetfulness!
My father stays my coming; answer not;
The tide is now: nay, not thy tide of tears;
That tide will stay me longer than I should.
Julia, farewell!
Exit JULIA
What, gone without a word?
Ay, so true love should do: it cannot speak;
For truth hath better deeds than words to grace it.
Enter PANTHINO
Sir Proteus, you are stayd for.
Go; I come, I come.
Alas! this parting strikes poor lovers dumb.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. A street.
Enter LAUNCE, leading a dog
Nay, twill be this hour ere I have done weeping;
all the kind of the Launces have this very fault. I
have received my proportion, like the prodigious
son, and am going with Sir Proteus to the Imperials
court. I think Crab, my dog, be the sourest-natured
dog that lives: my mother weeping, my father
wailing, my sister crying, our maid howling, our cat
wringing her hands, and all our house in a great
perplexity, yet did not this cruel-hearted cur shed
one tear: he is a stone, a very pebble stone, and
has no more pity in him than a dog: a Jew would have
wept to have seen our parting; why, my grandam,
having no eyes, look you, wept herself blind at my
parting. Nay, Ill show you the manner of it. This
shoe is my father: no, this left shoe is my father:
no, no, this left shoe is my mother: nay, that
cannot be so neither: yes, it is so, it is so, it
hath the worser sole. This shoe, with the hole in
it, is my mother, and this my father; a vengeance
ont! there tis: now, sit, this staff is my
sister, for, look you, she is as white as a lily and
as small as a wand: this hat is Nan, our maid: I
am the dog: no, the dog is himself, and I am the
dog--Oh! the dog is me, and I am myself; ay, so,
so. Now come I to my father; Father, your blessing:
now should not the shoe speak a word for weeping:
now should I kiss my father; well, he weeps on. Now
come I to my mother: O, that she could speak now
like a wood woman! Well, I kiss her; why, there
tis; heres my mothers breath up and down. Now
come I to my sister; mark the moan she makes. Now
the dog all this while sheds not a tear nor speaks a
word; but see how I lay the dust with my tears.
Enter PANTHINO
Launce, away, away, aboard! thy master is shipped
and thou art to post after with oars. Whats the
matter? why weepest thou, man? Away, ass! Youll
lose the tide, if you tarry any longer.
It is no matter if the tied were lost; for it is the
unkindest tied that ever any man tied.
Whats the unkindest tide?
Why, he thats tied here, Crab, my dog.
Tut, man, I mean thoult lose the flood, and, in
losing the flood, lose thy voyage, and, in losing
thy voyage, lose thy master, and, in losing thy
master, lose thy service, and, in losing thy
service,--Why dost thou stop my mouth?
For fear thou shouldst lose thy tongue.
Where should I lose my tongue?
In thy tale.
In thy tail!
Lose the tide, and the voyage, and the master, and
the service, and the tied! Why, man, if the river
were dry, I am able to fill it with my tears; if the
wind were down, I could drive the boat with my sighs.
Come, come away, man; I was sent to call thee.
Sir, call me what thou darest.
Wilt thou go?
Well, I will go.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Milan. The DUKEs palace.
Enter SILVIA, VALENTINE, THURIO, and SPEED
Servant!
Mistress?
Master, Sir Thurio frowns on you.
Ay, boy, its for love.
Not of you.
Of my mistress, then.
Twere good you knocked him.
Exit
Servant, you are sad.
Indeed, madam, I seem so.
Seem you that you are not?
Haply I do.
So do counterfeits.
So do you.
What seem I that I am not?
Wise.
What instance of the contrary?
Your folly.
And how quote you my folly?
I quote it in your jerkin.
My jerkin is a doublet.
Well, then, Ill double your folly.
How?
What, angry, Sir Thurio! do you change colour?
Give him leave, madam; he is a kind of chameleon.
That hath more mind to feed on your blood than live
in your air.
You have said, sir.
Ay, sir, and done too, for this time.
I know it well, sir; you always end ere you begin.
A fine volley of words, gentlemen, and quickly shot off.
Tis indeed, madam; we thank the giver.
Who is that, servant?
Yourself, sweet lady; for you gave the fire. Sir
Thurio borrows his wit from your ladyships looks,
and spends what he borrows kindly in your company.
Sir, if you spend word for word with me, I shall
make your wit bankrupt.
I know it well, sir; you have an exchequer of words,
and, I think, no other treasure to give your
followers, for it appears by their bare liveries,
that they live by your bare words.
No more, gentlemen, no more:--here comes my father.
Enter DUKE
Now, daughter Silvia, you are hard beset.
Sir Valentine, your fathers in good health:
What say you to a letter from your friends
Of much good news?
My lord, I will be thankful.
To any happy messenger from thence.
Know ye Don Antonio, your countryman?
Ay, my good lord, I know the gentleman
To be of worth and worthy estimation
And not without desert so well reputed.
Hath he not a son?
Ay, my good lord; a son that well deserves
The honour and regard of such a father.
You know him well?
I know him as myself; for from our infancy
We have conversed and spent our hours together:
And though myself have been an idle truant,
Omitting the sweet benefit of time
To clothe mine age with angel-like perfection,
Yet hath Sir Proteus, for thats his name,
Made use and fair advantage of his days;
His years but young, but his experience old;
His head unmellowd, but his judgment ripe;
And, in a word, for far behind his worth
Comes all the praises that I now bestow,
He is complete in feature and in mind
With all good grace to grace a gentleman.
Beshrew me, sir, but if he make this good,
He is as worthy for an empress love
As meet to be an emperors counsellor.
Well, sir, this gentleman is come to me,
With commendation from great potentates;
And here he means to spend his time awhile:
I think tis no unwelcome news to you.
Should I have wishd a thing, it had been he.
Welcome him then according to his worth.
Silvia, I speak to you, and you, Sir Thurio;
For Valentine, I need not cite him to it:
I will send him hither to you presently.
Exit
This is the gentleman I told your ladyship
Had come along with me, but that his mistress
Did hold his eyes lockd in her crystal looks.
Belike that now she hath enfranchised them
Upon some other pawn for fealty.
Nay, sure, I think she holds them prisoners still.
Nay, then he should be blind; and, being blind
How could he see his way to seek out you?
Why, lady, Love hath twenty pair of eyes.
They say that Love hath not an eye at all.
To see such lovers, Thurio, as yourself:
Upon a homely object Love can wink.
Have done, have done; here comes the gentleman.
Exit THURIO
Enter PROTEUS
Welcome, dear Proteus! Mistress, I beseech you,
Confirm his welcome with some special favour.
His worth is warrant for his welcome hither,
If this be he you oft have wishd to hear from.
Mistress, it is: sweet lady, entertain him
To be my fellow-servant to your ladyship.
Too low a mistress for so high a servant.
Not so, sweet  lady: but too mean a servant
To have a look of such a worthy mistress.
Leave off discourse of disability:
Sweet lady, entertain him for your servant.
My duty will I boast of; nothing else.
And duty never yet did want his meed:
Servant, you are welcome to a worthless mistress.
Ill die on him that says so but yourself.
That you are welcome?
That you are worthless.
Re-enter THURIO
Madam, my lord your father would speak with you.
I wait upon his pleasure. Come, Sir Thurio,
Go with me. Once more, new servant, welcome:
Ill leave you to confer of home affairs;
When you have done, we look to hear from you.
Well both attend upon your ladyship.
Exeunt SILVIA and THURIO
Now, tell me, how do all from whence you came?
Your friends are well and have them much commended.
And how do yours?
I left them all in health.
How does your lady? and how thrives your love?
My tales of love were wont to weary you;
I know you joy not in a love discourse.
Ay, Proteus, but that life is alterd now:
I have done penance for contemning Love,
Whose high imperious thoughts have punishd me
With bitter fasts, with penitential groans,
With nightly tears and daily heart-sore sighs;
For in revenge of my contempt of love,
Love hath chased sleep from my enthralled eyes
And made them watchers of mine own hearts sorrow.
O gentle Proteus, Loves a mighty lord,
And hath so humbled me, as, I confess,
There is no woe to his correction,
Nor to his service no such joy on earth.
Now no discourse, except it be of love;
Now can I break my fast, dine, sup and sleep,
Upon the very naked name of love.
Enough; I read your fortune in your eye.
Was this the idol that you worship so?
Even she; and is she not a heavenly saint?
No; but she is an earthly paragon.
Call her divine.
I will not flatter her.
O, flatter me; for love delights in praises.
When I was sick, you gave me bitter pills,
And I must minister the like to you.
Then speak the truth by her; if not divine,
Yet let her be a principality,
Sovereign to all the creatures on the earth.
Except my mistress.
Sweet, except not any;
Except thou wilt except against my love.
Have I not reason to prefer mine own?
And I will help thee to prefer her too:
She shall be dignified with this high honour--
To bear my ladys train, lest the base earth
Should from her vesture chance to steal a kiss
And, of so great a favour growing proud,
Disdain to root the summer-swelling flower
And make rough winter everlastingly.
Why, Valentine, what braggardism is this?
Pardon me, Proteus: all I can is nothing
To her whose worth makes other worthies nothing;
She is alone.
Then let her alone.
Not for the world: why, man, she is mine own,
And I as rich in having such a jewel
As twenty seas, if all their sand were pearl,
The water nectar and the rocks pure gold.
Forgive me that I do not dream on thee,
Because thou seest me dote upon my love.
My foolish rival, that her father likes
Only for his possessions are so huge,
Is gone with her along, and I must after,
For love, thou knowst, is full of jealousy.
But she loves you?
Ay, and we are betrothd: nay, more, our,
marriage-hour,
With all the cunning manner of our flight,
Determined of; how I must climb her window,
The ladder made of cords, and all the means
Plotted and greed on for my happiness.
Good Proteus, go with me to my chamber,
In these affairs to aid me with thy counsel.
Go on before; I shall inquire you forth:
I must unto the road, to disembark
Some necessaries that I needs must use,
And then Ill presently attend you.
Will you make haste?
I will.
Exit VALENTINE
Even as one heat another heat expels,
Or as one nail by strength drives out another,
So the remembrance of my former love
Is by a newer object quite forgotten.
Is it mine, or Valentines praise,
Her true perfection, or my false transgression,
That makes me reasonless to reason thus?
She is fair; and so is Julia that I love--
That I did love, for now my love is thawd;
Which, like a waxen image, gainst a fire,
Bears no impression of the thing it was.
Methinks my zeal to Valentine is cold,
And that I love him not as I was wont.
O, but I love his lady too too much,
And thats the reason I love him so little.
How shall I dote on her with more advice,
That thus without advice begin to love her!
Tis but her picture I have yet beheld,
And that hath dazzled my reasons light;
But when I look on her perfections,
There is no reason but I shall be blind.
If I can cheque my erring love, I will;
If not, to compass her Ill use my skill.
Exit
SCENE V. The same. A street.
Enter SPEED and LAUNCE severally
Launce! by mine honesty, welcome to Milan!
Forswear not thyself, sweet youth, for I am not
welcome. I reckon this always, that a man is never
undone till he be hanged, nor never welcome to a
place till some certain shot be paid and the hostess
say Welcome!
Come on, you madcap, Ill to the alehouse with you
presently; where, for one shot of five pence, thou
shalt have five thousand welcomes. But, sirrah, how
did thy master part with Madam Julia?
Marry, after they closed in earnest, they parted very
fairly in jest.
But shall she marry him?
No.
How then? shall he marry her?
No, neither.
What, are they broken?
No, they are both as whole as a fish.
Why, then, how stands the matter with them?
Marry, thus: when it stands well with him, it
stands well with her.
What an ass art thou! I understand thee not.
What a block art thou, that thou canst not! My
staff understands me.
What thou sayest?
Ay, and what I do too: look thee, Ill but lean,
and my staff understands me.
It stands under thee, indeed.
Why, stand-under and under-stand is all one.
But tell me true, willt be a match?
Ask my dog: if he say ay, it will! if he say no,
it will; if he shake his tail and say nothing, it will.
The conclusion is then that it will.
Thou shalt never get such a secret from me but by a parable.
Tis well that I get it so. But, Launce, how sayest
thou, that my master is become a notable lover?
I never knew him otherwise.
Than how?
A notable lubber, as thou reportest him to be.
Why, thou whoreson ass, thou mistakest me.
Why, fool, I meant not thee; I meant thy master.
I tell thee, my master is become a hot lover.
Why, I tell thee, I care not though he burn himself
in love. If thou wilt, go with me to the alehouse;
if not, thou art an Hebrew, a Jew, and not worth the
name of a Christian.
Why?
Because thou hast not so much charity in thee as to
go to the ale with a Christian. Wilt thou go?
At thy service.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. The same. The DUKES palace.
Enter PROTEUS
To leave my Julia, shall I be forsworn;
To love fair Silvia, shall I be forsworn;
To wrong my friend, I shall be much forsworn;
And even that power which gave me first my oath
Provokes me to this threefold perjury;
Love bade me swear and Love bids me forswear.
O sweet-suggesting Love, if thou hast sinned,
Teach me, thy tempted subject, to excuse it!
At first I did adore a twinkling star,
But now I worship a celestial sun.
Unheedful vows may heedfully be broken,
And he wants wit that wants resolved will
To learn his wit to exchange the bad for better.
Fie, fie, unreverend tongue! to call her bad,
Whose sovereignty so oft thou hast preferrd
With twenty thousand soul-confirming oaths.
I cannot leave to love, and yet I do;
But there I leave to love where I should love.
Julia I lose and Valentine I lose:
If I keep them, I needs must lose myself;
If I lose them, thus find I by their loss
For Valentine myself, for Julia Silvia.
I to myself am dearer than a friend,
For love is still most precious in itself;
And Silvia--witness Heaven, that made her fair!--
Shows Julia but a swarthy Ethiope.
I will forget that Julia is alive,
Remembering that my love to her is dead;
And Valentine Ill hold an enemy,
Aiming at Silvia as a sweeter friend.
I cannot now prove constant to myself,
Without some treachery used to Valentine.
This night he meaneth with a corded ladder
To climb celestial Silvias chamber-window,
Myself in counsel, his competitor.
Now presently Ill give her father notice
Of their disguising and pretended flight;
Who, all enraged, will banish Valentine;
For Thurio, he intends, shall wed his daughter;
But, Valentine being gone, Ill quickly cross
By some sly trick blunt Thurios dull proceeding.
Love, lend me wings to make my purpose swift,
As thou hast lent me wit to plot this drift!
Exit
SCENE VII. Verona. JULIAS house.
Enter JULIA and LUCETTA
Counsel, Lucetta; gentle girl, assist me;
And even in kind love I do conjure thee,
Who art the table wherein all my thoughts
Are visibly characterd and engraved,
To lesson me and tell me some good mean
How, with my honour, I may undertake
A journey to my loving Proteus.
Alas, the way is wearisome and long!
A true-devoted pilgrim is not weary
To measure kingdoms with his feeble steps;
Much less shall she that hath Loves wings to fly,
And when the flight is made to one so dear,
Of such divine perfection, as Sir Proteus.
Better forbear till Proteus make return.
O, knowst thou not his looks are my souls food?
Pity the dearth that I have pined in,
By longing for that food so long a time.
Didst thou but know the inly touch of love,
Thou wouldst as soon go kindle fire with snow
As seek to quench the fire of love with words.
I do not seek to quench your loves hot fire,
But qualify the fires extreme rage,
Lest it should burn above the bounds of reason.
The more thou dammst it up, the more it burns.
The current that with gentle murmur glides,
Thou knowst, being stoppd, impatiently doth rage;
But when his fair course is not hindered,
He makes sweet music with the enamelled stones,
Giving a gentle kiss to every sedge
He overtaketh in his pilgrimage,
And so by many winding nooks he strays
With willing sport to the wild ocean.
Then let me go and hinder not my course
Ill be as patient as a gentle stream
And make a pastime of each weary step,
Till the last step have brought me to my love;
And there Ill rest, as after much turmoil
A blessed soul doth in Elysium.
But in what habit will you go along?
Not like a woman; for I would prevent
The loose encounters of lascivious men:
Gentle Lucetta, fit me with such weeds
As may beseem some well-reputed page.
Why, then, your ladyship must cut your hair.
No, girl, Ill knit it up in silken strings
With twenty odd-conceited true-love knots.
To be fantastic may become a youth
Of greater time than I shall show to be.
What fashion, madam shall I make your breeches?
That fits as well as Tell me, good my lord,
What compass will you wear your farthingale?
Why even what fashion thou best likest, Lucetta.
You must needs have them with a codpiece, madam.
Out, out, Lucetta! that would be ill-favourd.
A round hose, madam, nows not worth a pin,
Unless you have a codpiece to stick pins on.
Lucetta, as thou lovest me, let me have
What thou thinkest meet and is most mannerly.
But tell me, wench, how will the world repute me
For undertaking so unstaid a journey?
I fear me, it will make me scandalized.
If you think so, then stay at home and go not.
Nay, that I will not.
Then never dream on infamy, but go.
If Proteus like your journey when you come,
No matter whos displeased when you are gone:
I fear me, he will scarce be pleased withal.
That is the least, Lucetta, of my fear:
A thousand oaths, an ocean of his tears
And instances of infinite of love
Warrant me welcome to my Proteus.
All these are servants to deceitful men.
Base men, that use them to so base effect!
But truer stars did govern Proteus birth
His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles,
His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate,
His tears pure messengers sent from his heart,
His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.
Pray heaven he prove so, when you come to him!
Now, as thou lovest me, do him not that wrong
To bear a hard opinion of his truth:
Only deserve my love by loving him;
And presently go with me to my chamber,
To take a note of what I stand in need of,
To furnish me upon my longing journey.
All that is mine I leave at thy dispose,
My goods, my lands, my reputation;
Only, in lieu thereof, dispatch me hence.
Come, answer not, but to it presently!
I am impatient of my tarriance.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. Milan. The DUKEs palace.
Enter DUKE, THURIO, and PROTEUS
Sir Thurio, give us leave, I pray, awhile;
We have some secrets to confer about.
Exit THURIO
Now, tell me, Proteus, whats your will with me?
My gracious lord, that which I would discover
The law of friendship bids me to conceal;
But when I call to mind your gracious favours
Done to me, undeserving as I am,
My duty pricks me on to utter that
Which else no worldly good should draw from me.
Know, worthy prince, Sir Valentine, my friend,
This night intends to steal away your daughter:
Myself am one made privy to the plot.
I know you have determined to bestow her
On Thurio, whom your gentle daughter hates;
And should she thus be stoln away from you,
It would be much vexation to your age.
Thus, for my dutys sake, I rather chose
To cross my friend in his intended drift
Than, by concealing it, heap on your head
A pack of sorrows which would press you down,
Being unprevented, to your timeless grave.
Proteus, I thank thee for thine honest care;
Which to requite, command me while I live.
This love of theirs myself have often seen,
Haply when they have judged me fast asleep,
And oftentimes have purposed to forbid
Sir Valentine her company and my court:
But fearing lest my jealous aim might err
And so unworthily disgrace the man,
A rashness that I ever yet have shunnd,
I gave him gentle looks, thereby to find
That which thyself hast now disclosed to me.
And, that thou mayst perceive my fear of this,
Knowing that tender youth is soon suggested,
I nightly lodge her in an upper tower,
The key whereof myself have ever kept;
And thence she cannot be conveyd away.
Know, noble lord, they have devised a mean
How he her chamber-window will ascend
And with a corded ladder fetch her down;
For which the youthful lover now is gone
And this way comes he with it presently;
Where, if it please you, you may intercept him.
But, good my Lord, do it so cunningly
That my discovery be not aimed at;
For love of you, not hate unto my friend,
Hath made me publisher of this pretence.
Upon mine honour, he shall never know
That I had any light from thee of this.
Adieu, my Lord; Sir Valentine is coming.
Exit
Enter VALENTINE
Sir Valentine, whither away so fast?
Please it your grace, there is a messenger
That stays to bear my letters to my friends,
And I am going to deliver them.
Be they of much import?
The tenor of them doth but signify
My health and happy being at your court.
Nay then, no matter; stay with me awhile;
I am to break with thee of some affairs
That touch me near, wherein thou must be secret.
Tis not unknown to thee that I have sought
To match my friend Sir Thurio to my daughter.
I know it well, my Lord; and, sure, the match
Were rich and honourable; besides, the gentleman
Is full of virtue, bounty, worth and qualities
Beseeming such a wife as your fair daughter:
Cannot your Grace win her to fancy him?
No, trust me; she is peevish, sullen, froward,
Proud, disobedient, stubborn, lacking duty,
Neither regarding that she is my child
Nor fearing me as if I were her father;
And, may I say to thee, this pride of hers,
Upon advice, hath drawn my love from her;
And, where I thought the remnant of mine age
Should have been cherishd by her child-like duty,
I now am full resolved to take a wife
And turn her out to who will take her in:
Then let her beauty be her wedding-dower;
For me and my possessions she esteems not.
What would your Grace have me to do in this?
There is a lady in Verona here
Whom I affect; but she is nice and coy
And nought esteems my aged eloquence:
Now therefore would I have thee to my tutor--
For long agone I have forgot to court;
Besides, the fashion of the time is changed--
How and which way I may bestow myself
To be regarded in her sun-bright eye.
Win her with gifts, if she respect not words:
Dumb jewels often in their silent kind
More than quick words do move a womans mind.
But she did scorn a present that I sent her.
A woman sometimes scorns what best contents her.
Send her another; never give her oer;
For scorn at first makes after-love the more.
If she do frown, tis not in hate of you,
But rather to beget more love in you:
If she do chide, tis not to have you gone;
For why, the fools are mad, if left alone.
Take no repulse, whatever she doth say;
For get you gone, she doth not mean away!
Flatter and praise, commend, extol their graces;
Though neer so black, say they have angels faces.
That man that hath a tongue, I say, is no man,
If with his tongue he cannot win a woman.
But she I mean is promised by her friends
Unto a youthful gentleman of worth,
And kept severely from resort of men,
That no man hath access by day to her.
Why, then, I would resort to her by night.
Ay, but the doors be lockd and keys kept safe,
That no man hath recourse to her by night.
What lets but one may enter at her window?
Her chamber is aloft, far from the ground,
And built so shelving that one cannot climb it
Without apparent hazard of his life.
Why then, a ladder quaintly made of cords,
To cast up, with a pair of anchoring hooks,
Would serve to scale another Heros tower,
So bold Leander would adventure it.
Now, as thou art a gentleman of blood,
Advise me where I may have such a ladder.
When would you use it? pray, sir, tell me that.
This very night; for Love is like a child,
That longs for every thing that he can come by.
By seven oclock Ill get you such a ladder.
But, hark thee; I will go to her alone:
How shall I best convey the ladder thither?
It will be light, my lord, that you may bear it
Under a cloak that is of any length.
A cloak as long as thine will serve the turn?
Ay, my good lord.
Then let me see thy cloak:
Ill get me one of such another length.
Why, any cloak will serve the turn, my lord.
How shall I fashion me to wear a cloak?
I pray thee, let me feel thy cloak upon me.
What letter is this same? Whats here? To Silvia!
And here an engine fit for my proceeding.
Ill be so bold to break the seal for once.
Reads
My thoughts do harbour with my Silvia nightly,
And slaves they are to me that send them flying:
O, could their master come and go as lightly,
Himself would lodge where senseless they are lying!
My herald thoughts in thy pure bosom rest them:
While I, their king, that hither them importune,
Do curse the grace that with such grace hath blessd them,
Because myself do want my servants fortune:
I curse myself, for they are sent by me,
That they should harbour where their lord would be.
Whats here?
Silvia, this night I will enfranchise thee.
Tis so; and heres the ladder for the purpose.
Why, Phaeton,--for thou art Merops son,--
Wilt thou aspire to guide the heavenly car
And with thy daring folly burn the world?
Wilt thou reach stars, because they shine on thee?
Go, base intruder! overweening slave!
Bestow thy fawning smiles on equal mates,
And think my patience, more than thy desert,
Is privilege for thy departure hence:
Thank me for this more than for all the favours
Which all too much I have bestowd on thee.
But if thou linger in my territories
Longer than swiftest expedition
Will give thee time to leave our royal court,
By heaven! my wrath shall far exceed the love
I ever bore my daughter or thyself.
Be gone! I will not hear thy vain excuse;
But, as thou lovest thy life, make speed from hence.
Exit
And why not death rather than living torment?
To die is to be banishd from myself;
And Silvia is myself: banishd from her
Is self from self: a deadly banishment!
What light is light, if Silvia be not seen?
What joy is joy, if Silvia be not by?
Unless it be to think that she is by
And feed upon the shadow of perfection
Except I be by Silvia in the night,
There is no music in the nightingale;
Unless I look on Silvia in the day,
There is no day for me to look upon;
She is my essence, and I leave to be,
If I be not by her fair influence
Fosterd, illumined, cherishd, kept alive.
I fly not death, to fly his deadly doom:
Tarry I here, I but attend on death:
But, fly I hence, I fly away from life.
Enter PROTEUS and LAUNCE
Run, boy, run, run, and seek him out.
Soho, soho!
What seest thou?
Him we go to find: theres not a hair ons head
but tis a Valentine.
Valentine?
No.
Who then? his spirit?
Neither.
What then?
Nothing.
Can nothing speak? Master, shall I strike?
Who wouldst thou strike?
Nothing.
Villain, forbear.
Why, sir, Ill strike nothing: I pray you,--
Sirrah, I say, forbear. Friend Valentine, a word.
My ears are stopt and cannot hear good news,
So much of bad already hath possessd them.
Then in dumb silence will I bury mine,
For they are harsh, untuneable and bad.
Is Silvia dead?
No, Valentine.
No Valentine, indeed, for sacred Silvia.
Hath she forsworn me?
No, Valentine.
No Valentine, if Silvia have forsworn me.
What is your news?
Sir, there is a proclamation that you are vanished.
That thou art banished--O, thats the news!--
From hence, from Silvia and from me thy friend.
O, I have fed upon this woe already,
And now excess of it will make me surfeit.
Doth Silvia know that I am banished?
Ay, ay; and she hath offerd to the doom--
Which, unreversed, stands in effectual force--
A sea of melting pearl, which some call tears:
Those at her fathers churlish feet she tenderd;
With them, upon her knees, her humble self;
Wringing her hands, whose whiteness so became them
As if but now they waxed pale for woe:
But neither bended knees, pure hands held up,
Sad sighs, deep groans, nor silver-shedding tears,
Could penetrate her uncompassionate sire;
But Valentine, if he be taen, must die.
Besides, her intercession chafed him so,
When she for thy repeal was suppliant,
That to close prison he commanded her,
With many bitter threats of biding there.
No more; unless the next word that thou speakst
Have some malignant power upon my life:
If so, I pray thee, breathe it in mine ear,
As ending anthem of my endless dolour.
Cease to lament for that thou canst not help,
And study help for that which thou lamentst.
Time is the nurse and breeder of all good.
Here if thou stay, thou canst not see thy love;
Besides, thy staying will abridge thy life.
Hope is a lovers staff; walk hence with that
And manage it against despairing thoughts.
Thy letters may be here, though thou art hence;
Which, being writ to me, shall be deliverd
Even in the milk-white bosom of thy love.
The time now serves not to expostulate:
Come, Ill convey thee through the city-gate;
And, ere I part with thee, confer at large
Of all that may concern thy love-affairs.
As thou lovest Silvia, though not for thyself,
Regard thy danger, and along with me!
I pray thee, Launce, an if thou seest my boy,
Bid him make haste and meet me at the North-gate.
Go, sirrah, find him out. Come, Valentine.
O my dear Silvia! Hapless Valentine!
Exeunt VALENTINE and PROTEUS
I am but a fool, look you; and yet I have the wit to
think my master is a kind of a knave: but thats
all one, if he be but one knave. He lives not now
that knows me to be in love; yet I am in love; but a
team of horse shall not pluck that from me; nor who
tis I love; and yet tis a woman; but what woman, I
will not tell myself; and yet tis a milkmaid; yet
tis not a maid, for she hath had gossips; yet tis
a maid, for she is her masters maid, and serves for
wages. She hath more qualities than a water-spaniel;
which is much in a bare Christian.
Pulling out a paper
Here is the cate-log of her condition.
Imprimis: She can fetch and carry. Why, a horse
can do no more: nay, a horse cannot fetch, but only
carry; therefore is she better than a jade. Item:
She can milk; look you, a sweet virtue in a maid
with clean hands.
Enter SPEED
How now, Signior Launce! what news with your
mastership?
With my masters ship? why, it is at sea.
Well, your old vice still; mistake the word. What
news, then, in your paper?
The blackest news that ever thou heardest.
Why, man, how black?
Why, as black as ink.
Let me read them.
Fie on thee, jolt-head! thou canst not read.
Thou liest; I can.
I will try thee. Tell me this: who begot thee?
Marry, the son of my grandfather.
O illiterate loiterer! it was the son of thy
grandmother: this proves that thou canst not read.
Come, fool, come; try me in thy paper.
There; and St. Nicholas be thy speed!
[Reads]  Imprimis: She can milk.
Ay, that she can.
Item: She brews good ale.
And thereof comes the proverb: Blessing of your
heart, you brew good ale.
Item: She can sew.
Thats as much as to say, Can she so?
Item: She can knit.
What need a man care for a stock with a wench, when
she can knit him a stock?
Item: She can wash and scour.
A special virtue: for then she need not be washed
and scoured.
Item: She can spin.
Then may I set the world on wheels, when she can
spin for her living.
Item: She hath many nameless virtues.
Thats as much as to say, bastard virtues; that,
indeed, know not their fathers and therefore have no names.
Here follow her vices.
Close at the heels of her virtues.
Item: She is not to be kissed fasting in respect
of her breath.
Well, that fault may be mended with a breakfast. Read on.
Item: She hath a sweet mouth.
That makes amends for her sour breath.
Item: She doth talk in her sleep.
Its no matter for that, so she sleep not in her talk.
Item: She is slow in words.
O villain, that set this down among her vices! To
be slow in words is a womans only virtue: I pray
thee, out witht, and place it for her chief virtue.
Item: She is proud.
Out with that too; it was Eves legacy, and cannot
be taen from her.
Item: She hath no teeth.
I care not for that neither, because I love crusts.
Item: She is curst.
Well, the best is, she hath no teeth to bite.
Item: She will often praise her liquor.
If her liquor be good, she shall: if she will not, I
will; for good things should be praised.
Item: She is too liberal.
Of her tongue she cannot, for thats writ down she
is slow of; of her purse she shall not, for that
Ill keep shut: now, of another thing she may, and
that cannot I help. Well, proceed.
Item: She hath more hair than wit, and more faults
than hairs, and more wealth than faults.
Stop there; Ill have her: she was mine, and not
mine, twice or thrice in that last article.
Rehearse that once more.
Item: She hath more hair than wit,--
More hair than wit? It may be; Ill prove it. The
cover of the salt hides the salt, and therefore it
is more than the salt; the hair that covers the wit
is more than the wit, for the greater hides the
less. Whats next?
And more faults than hairs,--
Thats monstrous: O, that that were out!
And more wealth than faults.
Why, that word makes the faults gracious. Well,
Ill have her; and if it be a match, as nothing is
impossible,--
What then?
