Why, then will I tell thee--that thy master stays
for thee at the North-gate.
For me?
For thee! ay, who art thou? he hath stayed for a
better man than thee.
And must I go to him?
Thou must run to him, for thou hast stayed so long
that going will scarce serve the turn.
Why didst not tell me sooner? pox of your love letters!
Exit
Now will he be swinged for reading my letter; an
unmannerly slave, that will thrust himself into
secrets! Ill after, to rejoice in the boys correction.
Exit
SCENE II. The same. The DUKEs palace.
Enter DUKE and THURIO
Sir Thurio, fear not but that she will love you,
Now Valentine is banishd from her sight.
Since his exile she hath despised me most,
Forsworn my company and raild at me,
That I am desperate of obtaining her.
This weak impress of love is as a figure
Trenched in ice, which with an hours heat
Dissolves to water and doth lose his form.
A little time will melt her frozen thoughts
And worthless Valentine shall be forgot.
Enter PROTEUS
How now, Sir Proteus! Is your countryman
According to our proclamation gone?
Gone, my good lord.
My daughter takes his going grievously.
A little time, my lord, will kill that grief.
So I believe; but Thurio thinks not so.
Proteus, the good conceit I hold of thee--
For thou hast shown some sign of good desert--
Makes me the better to confer with thee.
Longer than I prove loyal to your grace
Let me not live to look upon your grace.
Thou knowst how willingly I would effect
The match between Sir Thurio and my daughter.
I do, my lord.
And also, I think, thou art not ignorant
How she opposes her against my will
She did, my lord, when Valentine was here.
Ay, and perversely she persevers so.
What might we do to make the girl forget
The love of Valentine and love Sir Thurio?
The best way is to slander Valentine
With falsehood, cowardice and poor descent,
Three things that women highly hold in hate.
Ay, but shell think that it is spoke in hate.
Ay, if his enemy deliver it:
Therefore it must with circumstance be spoken
By one whom she esteemeth as his friend.
Then you must undertake to slander him.
And that, my lord, I shall be loath to do:
Tis an ill office for a gentleman,
Especially against his very friend.
Where your good word cannot advantage him,
Your slander never can endamage him;
Therefore the office is indifferent,
Being entreated to it by your friend.
You have prevaild, my lord; if I can do it
By ought that I can speak in his dispraise,
She shall not long continue love to him.
But say this weed her love from Valentine,
It follows not that she will love Sir Thurio.
Therefore, as you unwind her love from him,
Lest it should ravel and be good to none,
You must provide to bottom it on me;
Which must be done by praising me as much
As you in worth dispraise Sir Valentine.
And, Proteus, we dare trust you in this kind,
Because we know, on Valentines report,
You are already Loves firm votary
And cannot soon revolt and change your mind.
Upon this warrant shall you have access
Where you with Silvia may confer at large;
For she is lumpish, heavy, melancholy,
And, for your friends sake, will be glad of you;
Where you may temper her by your persuasion
To hate young Valentine and love my friend.
As much as I can do, I will effect:
But you, Sir Thurio, are not sharp enough;
You must lay lime to tangle her desires
By wailful sonnets, whose composed rhymes
Should be full-fraught with serviceable vows.
Ay,
Much is the force of heaven-bred poesy.
Say that upon the altar of her beauty
You sacrifice your tears, your sighs, your heart:
Write till your ink be dry, and with your tears
Moist it again, and frame some feeling line
That may discover such integrity:
For Orpheus lute was strung with poets sinews,
Whose golden touch could soften steel and stones,
Make tigers tame and huge leviathans
Forsake unsounded deeps to dance on sands.
After your dire-lamenting elegies,
Visit by night your ladys chamber-window
With some sweet concert; to their instruments
Tune a deploring dump: the nights dead silence
Will well become such sweet-complaining grievance.
This, or else nothing, will inherit her.
This discipline shows thou hast been in love.
And thy advice this night Ill put in practise.
Therefore, sweet Proteus, my direction-giver,
Let us into the city presently
To sort some gentlemen well skilld in music.
I have a sonnet that will serve the turn
To give the onset to thy good advice.
About it, gentlemen!
Well wait upon your grace till after supper,
And afterward determine our proceedings.
Even now about it! I will pardon you.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. The frontiers of Mantua. A forest.
Enter certain Outlaws
Fellows, stand fast; I see a passenger.
If there be ten, shrink not, but down with em.
Enter VALENTINE and SPEED
Stand, sir, and throw us that you have about ye:
If not: well make you sit and rifle you.
Sir, we are undone; these are the villains
That all the travellers do fear so much.
My friends,--
Thats not so, sir: we are your enemies.
Peace! well hear him.
Ay, by my beard, will we, for hes a proper man.
Then know that I have little wealth to lose:
A man I am crossd with adversity;
My riches are these poor habiliments,
Of which if you should here disfurnish me,
You take the sum and substance that I have.
Whither travel you?
To Verona.
Whence came you?
From Milan.
Have you long sojourned there?
Some sixteen months, and longer might have stayd,
If crooked fortune had not thwarted me.
What, were you banishd thence?
I was.
For what offence?
For that which now torments me to rehearse:
I killd a man, whose death I much repent;
Bu t yet I slew him manfully in fight,
Without false vantage or base treachery.
Why, neer repent it, if it were done so.
But were you banishd for so small a fault?
I was, and held me glad of such a doom.
Have you the tongues?
My youthful travel therein made me happy,
Or else I often had been miserable.
By the bare scalp of Robin Hoods fat friar,
This fellow were a king for our wild faction!
Well have him. Sirs, a word.
Master, be one of them; its an honourable kind of thievery.
Peace, villain!
Tell us this: have you any thing to take to?
Nothing but my fortune.
Know, then, that some of us are gentlemen,
Such as the fury of ungovernd youth
Thrust from the company of awful men:
Myself was from Verona banished
For practising to steal away a lady,
An heir, and near allied unto the duke.
And I from Mantua, for a gentleman,
Who, in my mood, I stabbd unto the heart.
And I for such like petty crimes as these,
But to the purpose--for we cite our faults,
That they may hold excusd our lawless lives;
And partly, seeing you are beautified
With goodly shape and by your own report
A linguist and a man of such perfection
As we do in our quality much want--
Indeed, because you are a banishd man,
Therefore, above the rest, we parley to you:
Are you content to be our general?
To make a virtue of necessity
And live, as we do, in this wilderness?
What sayst thou? wilt thou be of our consort?
Say ay, and be the captain of us all:
Well do thee homage and be ruled by thee,
Love thee as our commander and our king.
But if thou scorn our courtesy, thou diest.
Thou shalt not live to brag what we have offerd.
I take your offer and will live with you,
Provided that you do no outrages
On silly women or poor passengers.
No, we detest such vile base practises.
Come, go with us, well bring thee to our crews,
And show thee all the treasure we have got,
Which, with ourselves, all rest at thy dispose.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Milan. Outside the DUKEs palace, under SILVIAs chamber.
Enter PROTEUS
Already have I been false to Valentine
And now I must be as unjust to Thurio.
Under the colour of commending him,
I have access my own love to prefer:
But Silvia is too fair, too true, too holy,
To be corrupted with my worthless gifts.
When I protest true loyalty to her,
She twits me with my falsehood to my friend;
When to her beauty I commend my vows,
She bids me think how I have been forsworn
In breaking faith with Julia whom I loved:
And notwithstanding all her sudden quips,
The least whereof would quell a lovers hope,
Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love,
The more it grows and fawneth on her still.
But here comes Thurio: now must we to her window,
And give some evening music to her ear.
Enter THURIO and Musicians
How now, Sir Proteus, are you crept before us?
Ay, gentle Thurio: for you know that love
Will creep in service where it cannot go.
Ay, but I hope, sir, that you love not here.
Sir, but I do; or else I would be hence.
Who? Silvia?
Ay, Silvia; for your sake.
I thank you for your own. Now, gentlemen,
Lets tune, and to it lustily awhile.
Enter, at a distance, Host, and JULIA in boys clothes
Now, my young guest, methinks youre allycholly: I
pray you, why is it?
Marry, mine host, because I cannot be merry.
Come, well have you merry: Ill bring you where
you shall hear music and see the gentleman that you asked for.
But shall I hear him speak?
Ay, that you shall.
That will be music.
Music plays
Hark, hark!
Is he among these?
Ay: but, peace! lets hear em.
SONG.
Who is Silvia? what is she,
That all our swains commend her?
Holy, fair and wise is she;
The heaven such grace did lend her,
That she might admired be.
Is she kind as she is fair?
For beauty lives with kindness.
Love doth to her eyes repair,
To help him of his blindness,
And, being helpd, inhabits there.
Then to Silvia let us sing,
That Silvia is excelling;
She excels each mortal thing
Upon the dull earth dwelling:
To her let us garlands bring.
How now! are you sadder than you were before? How
do you, man? the music likes you not.
You mistake; the musician likes me not.
Why, my pretty youth?
He plays false, father.
How? out of tune on the strings?
Not so; but yet so false that he grieves my very
heart-strings.
You have a quick ear.
Ay, I would I were deaf; it makes me have a slow heart.
I perceive you delight not in music.
Not a whit, when it jars so.
Hark, what fine change is in the music!
Ay, that change is the spite.
You would have them always play but one thing?
I would always have one play but one thing.
But, host, doth this Sir Proteus that we talk on
Often resort unto this gentlewoman?
I tell you what Launce, his man, told me: he loved
her out of all nick.
Where is Launce?
Gone to seek his dog; which tomorrow, by his
masters command, he must carry for a present to his lady.
Peace! stand aside: the company parts.
Sir Thurio, fear not you: I will so plead
That you shall say my cunning drift excels.
Where meet we?
At Saint Gregorys well.
Farewell.
Exeunt THURIO and Musicians
Enter SILVIA above
Madam, good even to your ladyship.
I thank you for your music, gentlemen.
Who is that that spake?
One, lady, if you knew his pure hearts truth,
You would quickly learn to know him by his voice.
Sir Proteus, as I take it.
Sir Proteus, gentle lady, and your servant.
Whats your will?
That I may compass yours.
You have your wish; my will is even this:
That presently you hie you home to bed.
Thou subtle, perjured, false, disloyal man!
Thinkst thou I am so shallow, so conceitless,
To be seduced by thy flattery,
That hast deceived so many with thy vows?
Return, return, and make thy love amends.
For me, by this pale queen of night I swear,
I am so far from granting thy request
That I despise thee for thy wrongful suit,
And by and by intend to chide myself
Even for this time I spend in talking to thee.
I grant, sweet love, that I did love a lady;
But she is dead.
[Aside]        Twere false, if I should speak it;
For I am sure she is not buried.
Say that she be; yet Valentine thy friend
Survives; to whom, thyself art witness,
I am betrothd: and art thou not ashamed
To wrong him with thy importunacy?
I likewise hear that Valentine is dead.
And so suppose am I; for in his grave
Assure thyself my love is buried.
Sweet lady, let me rake it from the earth.
Go to thy ladys grave and call hers thence,
Or, at the least, in hers sepulchre thine.
[Aside]  He heard not that.
Madam, if your heart be so obdurate,
Vouchsafe me yet your picture for my love,
The picture that is hanging in your chamber;
To that Ill speak, to that Ill sigh and weep:
For since the substance of your perfect self
Is else devoted, I am but a shadow;
And to your shadow will I make true love.
[Aside]  If twere a substance, you would, sure,
deceive it,
And make it but a shadow, as I am.
I am very loath to be your idol, sir;
But since your falsehood shall become you well
To worship shadows and adore false shapes,
Send to me in the morning and Ill send it:
And so, good rest.
As wretches have oernight
That wait for execution in the morn.
Exeunt PROTEUS and SILVIA severally
Host, will you go?
By my halidom, I was fast asleep.
Pray you, where lies Sir Proteus?
Marry, at my house. Trust me, I think tis almost
day.
Not so; but it hath been the longest night
That eer I watchd and the most heaviest.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same.
Enter EGLAMOUR
This is the hour that Madam Silvia
Entreated me to call and know her mind:
Theres some great matter sheld employ me in.
Madam, madam!
Enter SILVIA above
Who calls?
Your servant and your friend;
One that attends your ladyships command.
Sir Eglamour, a thousand times good morrow.
As many, worthy lady, to yourself:
According to your ladyships impose,
I am thus early come to know what service
It is your pleasure to command me in.
O Eglamour, thou art a gentleman--
Think not I flatter, for I swear I do not--
Valiant, wise, remorseful, well accomplishd:
Thou art not ignorant what dear good will
I bear unto the banishd Valentine,
Nor how my father would enforce me marry
Vain Thurio, whom my very soul abhors.
Thyself hast loved; and I have heard thee say
No grief did ever come so near thy heart
As when thy lady and thy true love died,
Upon whose grave thou vowdst pure chastity.
Sir Eglamour, I would to Valentine,
To Mantua, where I hear he makes abode;
And, for the ways are dangerous to pass,
I do desire thy worthy company,
Upon whose faith and honour I repose.
Urge not my fathers anger, Eglamour,
But think upon my grief, a ladys grief,
And on the justice of my flying hence,
To keep me from a most unholy match,
Which heaven and fortune still rewards with plagues.
I do desire thee, even from a heart
As full of sorrows as the sea of sands,
To bear me company and go with me:
If not, to hide what I have said to thee,
That I may venture to depart alone.
Madam, I pity much your grievances;
Which since I know they virtuously are placed,
I give consent to go along with you,
Recking as little what betideth me
As much I wish all good befortune you.
When will you go?
This evening coming.
Where shall I meet you?
At Friar Patricks cell,
Where I intend holy confession.
I will not fail your ladyship. Good morrow, gentle lady.
Good morrow, kind Sir Eglamour.
Exeunt severally
SCENE IV. The same.
Enter LAUNCE, with his his Dog
When a mans servant shall play the cur with him,
look you, it goes hard: one that I brought up of a
puppy; one that I saved from drowning, when three or
four of his blind brothers and sisters went to it.
I have taught him, even as one would say precisely,
thus I would teach a dog. I was sent to deliver
him as a present to Mistress Silvia from my master;
and I came no sooner into the dining-chamber but he
steps me to her trencher and steals her capons leg:
O, tis a foul thing when a cur cannot keep himself
in all companies! I would have, as one should say,
one that takes upon him to be a dog indeed, to be,
as it were, a dog at all things. If I had not had
more wit than he, to take a fault upon me that he did,
I think verily he had been hanged fort; sure as I
live, he had suffered fort; you shall judge. He
thrusts me himself into the company of three or four
gentlemanlike dogs under the dukes table: he had
not been there--bless the mark!--a pissing while, but
all the chamber smelt him. Out with the dog! says
one: What cur is that? says another: Whip him
out says the third: Hang him up says the duke.
I, having been acquainted with the smell before,
knew it was Crab, and goes me to the fellow that
whips the dogs: Friend, quoth I, you mean to whip
the dog? Ay, marry, do I, quoth he. You do him
the more wrong, quoth I; twas I did the thing you
wot of. He makes me no more ado, but whips me out
of the chamber. How many masters would do this for
his servant? Nay, Ill be sworn, I have sat in the
stocks for puddings he hath stolen, otherwise he had
been executed; I have stood on the pillory for geese
he hath killed, otherwise he had suffered fort.
Thou thinkest not of this now. Nay, I remember the
trick you served me when I took my leave of Madam
Silvia: did not I bid thee still mark me and do as I
do? when didst thou see me heave up my leg and make
water against a gentlewomans farthingale? didst
thou ever see me do such a trick?
Enter PROTEUS and JULIA
Sebastian is thy name? I like thee well
And will employ thee in some service presently.
In what you please: Ill do what I can.
I hope thou wilt.
To LAUNCE
How now, you whoreson peasant!
Where have you been these two days loitering?
Marry, sir, I carried Mistress Silvia the dog you bade me.
And what says she to my little jewel?
Marry, she says your dog was a cur, and tells you
currish thanks is good enough for such a present.
But she received my dog?
No, indeed, did she not: here have I brought him
back again.
What, didst thou offer her this from me?
Ay, sir: the other squirrel was stolen from me by
the hangman boys in the market-place: and then I
offered her mine own, who is a dog as big as ten of
yours, and therefore the gift the greater.
Go get thee hence, and find my dog again,
Or neer return again into my sight.
Away, I say! stayst thou to vex me here?
Exit LAUNCE
A slave, that still an end turns me to shame!
Sebastian, I have entertained thee,
Partly that I have need of such a youth
That can with some discretion do my business,
For tis no trusting to yond foolish lout,
But chiefly for thy face and thy behavior,
Which, if my augury deceive me not,
Witness good bringing up, fortune and truth:
Therefore know thou, for this I entertain thee.
Go presently and take this ring with thee,
Deliver it to Madam Silvia:
She loved me well deliverd it to me.
It seems you loved not her, to leave her token.
She is dead, belike?
Not so; I think she lives.
Alas!
Why dost thou cry alas?
I cannot choose
But pity her.
Wherefore shouldst thou pity her?
Because methinks that she loved you as well
As you do love your lady Silvia:
She dreams of him that has forgot her love;
You dote on her that cares not for your love.
Tis pity love should be so contrary;
And thinking of it makes me cry alas!
Well, give her that ring and therewithal
This letter. Thats her chamber. Tell my lady
I claim the promise for her heavenly picture.
Your message done, hie home unto my chamber,
Where thou shalt find me, sad and solitary.
Exit
How many women would do such a message?
Alas, poor Proteus! thou hast entertaind
A fox to be the shepherd of thy lambs.
Alas, poor fool! why do I pity him
That with his very heart despiseth me?
Because he loves her, he despiseth me;
Because I love him I must pity him.
This ring I gave him when he parted from me,
To bind him to remember my good will;
And now am I, unhappy messenger,
To plead for that which I would not obtain,
To carry that which I would have refused,
To praise his faith which I would have dispraised.
I am my masters true-confirmed love;
But cannot be true servant to my master,
Unless I prove false traitor to myself.
Yet will I woo for him, but yet so coldly
As, heaven it knows, I would not have him speed.
Enter SILVIA, attended
Gentlewoman, good day! I pray you, be my mean
To bring me where to speak with Madam Silvia.
What would you with her, if that I be she?
If you be she, I do entreat your patience
To hear me speak the message I am sent on.
From whom?
From my master, Sir Proteus, madam.
O, he sends you for a picture.
Ay, madam.
Ursula, bring my picture here.
Go give your master this: tell him from me,
One Julia, that his changing thoughts forget,
Would better fit his chamber than this shadow.
Madam, please you peruse this letter.--
Pardon me, madam; I have unadvised
Deliverd you a paper that I should not:
This is the letter to your ladyship.
I pray thee, let me look on that again.
It may not be; good madam, pardon me.
There, hold!
I will not look upon your masters lines:
I know they are stuffd with protestations
And full of new-found oaths; which he will break
As easily as I do tear his paper.
Madam, he sends your ladyship this ring.
The more shame for him that he sends it me;
For I have heard him say a thousand times
His Julia gave it him at his departure.
Though his false finger have profaned the ring,
Mine shall not do his Julia so much wrong.
She thanks you.
What sayst thou?
I thank you, madam, that you tender her.
Poor gentlewoman! my master wrongs her much.
Dost thou know her?
Almost as well as I do know myself:
To think upon her woes I do protest
That I have wept a hundred several times.
Belike she thinks that Proteus hath forsook her.
I think she doth; and thats her cause of sorrow.
Is she not passing fair?
She hath been fairer, madam, than she is:
When she did think my master loved her well,
She, in my judgment, was as fair as you:
But since she did neglect her looking-glass
And threw her sun-expelling mask away,
The air hath starved the roses in her cheeks
And pinchd the lily-tincture of her face,
That now she is become as black as I.
How tall was she?
About my stature; for at Pentecost,
When all our pageants of delight were playd,
Our youth got me to play the womans part,
And I was trimmd in Madam Julias gown,
Which served me as fit, by all mens judgments,
As if the garment had been made for me:
Therefore I know she is about my height.
And at that time I made her weep agood,
For I did play a lamentable part:
Madam, twas Ariadne passioning
For Theseus perjury and unjust flight;
Which I so lively acted with my tears
That my poor mistress, moved therewithal,
Wept bitterly; and would I might be dead
If I in thought felt not her very sorrow!
She is beholding to thee, gentle youth.
Alas, poor lady, desolate and left!
I weep myself to think upon thy words.
Here, youth, there is my purse; I give thee this
For thy sweet mistress sake, because thou lovest her.
Farewell.
Exit SILVIA, with attendants
And she shall thank you fort, if eer you know her.
A virtuous gentlewoman, mild and beautiful
I hope my masters suit will be but cold,
Since she respects my mistress love so much.
Alas, how love can trifle with itself!
Here is her picture: let me see; I think,
If I had such a tire, this face of mine
Were full as lovely as is this of hers:
And yet the painter flatterd her a little,
Unless I flatter with myself too much.
Her hair is auburn, mine is perfect yellow:
If that be all the difference in his love,
Ill get me such a colourd periwig.
Her eyes are grey as glass, and so are mine:
Ay, but her foreheads low, and mines as high.
What should it be that he respects in her
But I can make respective in myself,
If this fond Love were not a blinded god?
Come, shadow, come and take this shadow up,
For tis thy rival. O thou senseless form,
Thou shalt be worshippd, kissd, loved and adored!
And, were there sense in his idolatry,
My substance should be statue in thy stead.
Ill use thee kindly for thy mistress sake,
That used me so; or else, by Jove I vow,
I should have scratchd out your unseeing eyes
To make my master out of love with thee!
Exit
ACT V
SCENE I. Milan. An abbey.
Enter EGLAMOUR
The sun begins to gild the western sky;
And now it is about the very hour
That Silvia, at Friar Patricks cell, should meet me.
She will not fail, for lovers break not hours,
Unless it be to come before their time;
So much they spur their expedition.
See where she comes.
Enter SILVIA
Lady, a happy evening!
Amen, amen! Go on, good Eglamour,
Out at the postern by the abbey-wall:
I fear I am attended by some spies.
Fear not: the forest is not three leagues off;
If we recover that, we are sure enough.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. The DUKEs palace.
Enter THURIO, PROTEUS, and JULIA
Sir Proteus, what says Silvia to my suit?
O, sir, I find her milder than she was;
And yet she takes exceptions at your person.
What, that my leg is too long?
No; that it is too little.
Ill wear a boot, to make it somewhat rounder.
[Aside]  But love will not be spurrd to what
it loathes.
What says she to my face?
She says it is a fair one.
Nay then, the wanton lies; my face is black.
But pearls are fair; and the old saying is,
Black men are pearls in beauteous ladies eyes.
[Aside]  Tis true; such pearls as put out
ladies eyes;
For I had rather wink than look on them.
How likes she my discourse?
Ill, when you talk of war.
But well, when I discourse of love and peace?
[Aside]  But better, indeed, when you hold your peace.
What says she to my valour?
O, sir, she makes no doubt of that.
[Aside]  She needs not, when she knows it cowardice.
What says she to my birth?
That you are well derived.
[Aside]  True; from a gentleman to a fool.
Considers she my possessions?
O, ay; and pities them.
Wherefore?
[Aside]  That such an ass should owe them.
That they are out by lease.
Here comes the duke.
Enter DUKE
How now, Sir Proteus! how now, Thurio!
Which of you saw Sir Eglamour of late?
Not I.
Nor I.
Saw you my daughter?
Neither.
Why then,
Shes fled unto that peasant Valentine;
And Eglamour is in her company.
Tis true; for Friar Laurence met them both,
As he in penance wanderd through the forest;
Him he knew well, and guessd that it was she,
But, being maskd, he was not sure of it;
Besides, she did intend confession
At Patricks cell this even; and there she was not;
These likelihoods confirm her flight from hence.
Therefore, I pray you, stand not to discourse,
But mount you presently and meet with me
Upon the rising of the mountain-foot
That leads towards Mantua, whither they are fled:
Dispatch, sweet gentlemen, and follow me.
Exit
Why, this it is to be a peevish girl,
That flies her fortune when it follows her.
Ill after, more to be revenged on Eglamour
Than for the love of reckless Silvia.
Exit
And I will follow, more for Silvias love
Than hate of Eglamour that goes with her.
Exit
And I will follow, more to cross that love
Than hate for Silvia that is gone for love.
Exit
SCENE III. The frontiers of Mantua. The forest.
Enter Outlaws with SILVIA
Come, come,
Be patient; we must bring you to our captain.
A thousand more mischances than this one
Have learnd me how to brook this patiently.
Come, bring her away.
Where is the gentleman that was with her?
Being nimble-footed, he hath outrun us,
But Moyses and Valerius follow him.
Go thou with her to the west end of the wood;
There is our captain: well follow him thats fled;
The thicket is beset; he cannot scape.
Come, I must bring you to our captains cave:
Fear not; he bears an honourable mind,
And will not use a woman lawlessly.
O Valentine, this I endure for thee!
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Another part of the forest.
Enter VALENTINE
How use doth breed a habit in a man!
This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods,
I better brook than flourishing peopled towns:
Here can I sit alone, unseen of any,
And to the nightingales complaining notes
Tune my distresses and record my woes.
O thou that dost inhabit in my breast,
Leave not the mansion so long tenantless,
Lest, growing ruinous, the building fall
And leave no memory of what it was!
Repair me with thy presence, Silvia;
Thou gentle nymph, cherish thy forlorn swain!
What halloing and what stir is this to-day?
These are my mates, that make their wills their law,
Have some unhappy passenger in chase.
They love me well; yet I have much to do
To keep them from uncivil outrages.
Withdraw thee, Valentine: whos this comes here?
Enter PROTEUS, SILVIA, and JULIA
Madam, this service I have done for you,
Though you respect not aught your servant doth,
To hazard life and rescue you from him
That would have forced your honour and your love;
Vouchsafe me, for my meed, but one fair look;
A smaller boon than this I cannot beg
And less than this, I am sure, you cannot give.
[Aside]  How like a dream is this I see and hear!
Love, lend me patience to forbear awhile.
O miserable, unhappy that I am!
Unhappy were you, madam, ere I came;
But by my coming I have made you happy.
By thy approach thou makest me most unhappy.
[Aside]  And me, when he approacheth to your presence.
Had I been seized by a hungry lion,
I would have been a breakfast to the beast,
Rather than have false Proteus rescue me.
O, Heaven be judge how I love Valentine,
Whose lifes as tender to me as my soul!
And full as much, for more there cannot be,
I do detest false perjured Proteus.
Therefore be gone; solicit me no more.
What dangerous action, stood it next to death,
Would I not undergo for one calm look!
O, tis the curse in love, and still approved,
When women cannot love where theyre beloved!
When Proteus cannot love where hes beloved.
Read over Julias heart, thy first best love,
For whose dear sake thou didst then rend thy faith
Into a thousand oaths; and all those oaths
Descended into perjury, to love me.
Thou hast no faith left now, unless thoudst two;
And thats far worse than none; better have none
Than plural faith which is too much by one:
Thou counterfeit to thy true friend!
In love
Who respects friend?
All men but Proteus.
Nay, if the gentle spirit of moving words
Can no way change you to a milder form,
Ill woo you like a soldier, at arms end,
And love you gainst the nature of love,--force ye.
O heaven!
Ill force thee yield to my desire.
Ruffian, let go that rude uncivil touch,
Thou friend of an ill fashion!
Valentine!
Thou common friend, thats without faith or love,
For such is a friend now; treacherous man!
Thou hast beguiled my hopes; nought but mine eye
Could have persuaded me: now I dare not say
I have one friend alive; thou wouldst disprove me.
Who should be trusted, when ones own right hand
Is perjured to the bosom? Proteus,
I am sorry I must never trust thee more,
But count the world a stranger for thy sake.
The private wound is deepest: O time most accurst,
Mongst all foes that a friend should be the worst!
My shame and guilt confounds me.
Forgive me, Valentine: if hearty sorrow
Be a sufficient ransom for offence,
I tender t here; I do as truly suffer
As eer I did commit.
Then I am paid;
And once again I do receive thee honest.
Who by repentance is not satisfied
Is nor of heaven nor earth, for these are pleased.
By penitence the Eternals wraths appeased:
And, that my love may appear plain and free,
All that was mine in Silvia I give thee.
O me unhappy!
Swoons
Look to the boy.
Why, boy! why, wag! how now! whats the matter?
Look up; speak.
O good sir, my master charged me to deliver a ring
to Madam Silvia, which, out of my neglect, was never done.
Where is that ring, boy?
Here tis; this is it.
How! let me see:
Why, this is the ring I gave to Julia.
O, cry you mercy, sir, I have mistook:
This is the ring you sent to Silvia.
But how camest thou by this ring? At my depart
I gave this unto Julia.
And Julia herself did give it me;
And Julia herself hath brought it hither.
How! Julia!
Behold her that gave aim to all thy oaths,
And entertaind em deeply in her heart.
How oft hast thou with perjury cleft the root!
O Proteus, let this habit make thee blush!
Be thou ashamed that I have took upon me
Such an immodest raiment, if shame live
In a disguise of love:
It is the lesser blot, modesty finds,
Women to change their shapes than men their minds.
Than men their minds! tis true.
O heaven! were man
But constant, he were perfect. That one error
Fills him with faults; makes him run through all the sins:
Inconstancy falls off ere it begins.
What is in Silvias face, but I may spy
More fresh in Julias with a constant eye?
Come, come, a hand from either:
Let me be blest to make this happy close;
Twere pity two such friends should be long foes.
Bear witness, Heaven, I have my wish for ever.
And I mine.
Enter Outlaws, with DUKE and THURIO
A prize, a prize, a prize!
Forbear, forbear, I say! it is my lord the duke.
Your grace is welcome to a man disgraced,
Banished Valentine.
Sir Valentine!
Yonder is Silvia; and Silvias mine.
Thurio, give back, or else embrace thy death;
Come not within the measure of my wrath;
Do not name Silvia thine; if once again,
Verona shall not hold thee. Here she stands;
Take but possession of her with a touch:
I dare thee but to breathe upon my love.
Sir Valentine, I care not for her, I;
I hold him but a fool that will endanger
His body for a girl that loves him not:
I claim her not, and therefore she is thine.
The more degenerate and base art thou,
To make such means for her as thou hast done
And leave her on such slight conditions.
Now, by the honour of my ancestry,
I do applaud thy spirit, Valentine,
And think thee worthy of an empress love:
Know then, I here forget all former griefs,
Cancel all grudge, repeal thee home again,
Plead a new state in thy unrivalld merit,
To which I thus subscribe: Sir Valentine,
Thou art a gentleman and well derived;
Take thou thy Silvia, for thou hast deserved her.
I thank your grace; the gift hath made me happy.
I now beseech you, for your daughters sake,
To grant one boom that I shall ask of you.
I grant it, for thine own, whateer it be.
These banishd men that I have kept withal
Are men endued with worthy qualities:
Forgive them what they have committed here
And let them be recalld from their exile:
They are reformed, civil, full of good
And fit for great employment, worthy lord.
Thou hast prevaild; I pardon them and thee:
Dispose of them as thou knowst their deserts.
Come, let us go: we will include all jars
With triumphs, mirth and rare solemnity.
And, as we walk along, I dare be bold
With our discourse to make your grace to smile.
What think you of this page, my lord?
I think the boy hath grace in him; he blushes.
I warrant you, my lord, more grace than boy.
What mean you by that saying?
Please you, Ill tell you as we pass along,
That you will wonder what hath fortuned.
Come, Proteus; tis your penance but to hear
The story of your loves discovered:
That done, our day of marriage shall be yours;
One feast, one house, one mutual happiness.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Antechamber in LEONTES palace.
Enter CAMILLO and ARCHIDAMUS
If you shall chance, Camillo, to visit Bohemia, on
the like occasion whereon my services are now on
foot, you shall see, as I have said, great
difference betwixt our Bohemia and your Sicilia.
I think, this coming summer, the King of Sicilia
means to pay Bohemia the visitation which he justly owes him.
Wherein our entertainment shall shame us we will be
justified in our loves; for indeed--
Beseech you,--
Verily, I speak it in the freedom of my knowledge:
we cannot with such magnificence--in so rare--I know
not what to say. We will give you sleepy drinks,
that your senses, unintelligent of our insufficience,
may, though they cannot praise us, as little accuse
us.
You pay a great deal too dear for whats given freely.
Believe me, I speak as my understanding instructs me
and as mine honesty puts it to utterance.
Sicilia cannot show himself over-kind to Bohemia.
They were trained together in their childhoods; and
there rooted betwixt them then such an affection,
which cannot choose but branch now. Since their
more mature dignities and royal necessities made
separation of their society, their encounters,
though not personal, have been royally attorneyed
with interchange of gifts, letters, loving
embassies; that they have seemed to be together,
though absent, shook hands, as over a vast, and
embraced, as it were, from the ends of opposed
winds. The heavens continue their loves!
I think there is not in the world either malice or
matter to alter it. You have an unspeakable
comfort of your young prince Mamillius: it is a
gentleman of the greatest promise that ever came
into my note.
I very well agree with you in the hopes of him: it
is a gallant child; one that indeed physics the
subject, makes old hearts fresh: they that went on
crutches ere he was born desire yet their life to
see him a man.
Would they else be content to die?
Yes; if there were no other excuse why they should
desire to live.
If the king had no son, they would desire to live
on crutches till he had one.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A room of state in the same.
Enter LEONTES, HERMIONE, MAMILLIUS, POLIXENES, CAMILLO, and Attendants
Nine changes of the watery star hath been
The shepherds note since we have left our throne
Without a burthen: time as long again
Would be find up, my brother, with our thanks;
And yet we should, for perpetuity,
Go hence in debt: and therefore, like a cipher,
Yet standing in rich place, I multiply
With one We thank you many thousands moe
That go before it.
Stay your thanks a while;
And pay them when you part.
Sir, thats to-morrow.
I am questiond by my fears, of what may chance
Or breed upon our absence; that may blow
No sneaping winds at home, to make us say
This is put forth too truly: besides, I have stayd
To tire your royalty.
We are tougher, brother,
Than you can put us tot.
No longer stay.
One seven-night longer.
Very sooth, to-morrow.
Well part the time betweens then; and in that
Ill no gainsaying.
Press me not, beseech you, so.
There is no tongue that moves, none, none i the world,
So soon as yours could win me: so it should now,
Were there necessity in your request, although
Twere needful I denied it. My affairs
Do even drag me homeward: which to hinder
Were in your love a whip to me; my stay
To you a charge and trouble: to save both,
Farewell, our brother.
Tongue-tied, our queen?
speak you.
I had thought, sir, to have held my peace until
You have drawn oaths from him not to stay. You, sir,
Charge him too coldly. Tell him, you are sure
All in Bohemias well; this satisfaction
The by-gone day proclaimd: say this to him,
Hes beat from his best ward.
Well said, Hermione.
