To tell, he longs to see his son, were strong:
But let him say so then, and let him go;
But let him swear so, and he shall not stay,
Well thwack him hence with distaffs.
Yet of your royal presence Ill adventure
The borrow of a week. When at Bohemia
You take my lord, Ill give him my commission
To let him there a month behind the gest
Prefixd fors parting: yet, good deed, Leontes,
I love thee not a jar o the clock behind
What lady-she her lord. Youll stay?
No, madam.
Nay, but you will?
I may not, verily.
Verily!
You put me off with limber vows; but I,
Though you would seek to unsphere the
stars with oaths,
Should yet say Sir, no going. Verily,
You shall not go: a ladys Verily s
As potent as a lords. Will you go yet?
Force me to keep you as a prisoner,
Not like a guest; so you shall pay your fees
When you depart, and save your thanks. How say you?
My prisoner? or my guest? by your dread Verily,
One of them you shall be.
Your guest, then, madam:
To be your prisoner should import offending;
Which is for me less easy to commit
Than you to punish.
Not your gaoler, then,
But your kind hostess. Come, Ill question you
Of my lords tricks and yours when you were boys:
You were pretty lordings then?
We were, fair queen,
Two lads that thought there was no more behind
But such a day to-morrow as to-day,
And to be boy eternal.
Was not my lord
The verier wag o the two?
We were as twinnd lambs that did frisk i the sun,
And bleat the one at the other: what we changed
Was innocence for innocence; we knew not
The doctrine of ill-doing, nor dreamd
That any did. Had we pursued that life,
And our weak spirits neer been higher reard
With stronger blood, we should have answerd heaven
Boldly not guilty; the imposition cleard
Hereditary ours.
By this we gather
You have trippd since.
O my most sacred lady!
Temptations have since then been born tos; for
In those unfledged days was my wife a girl;
Your precious self had then not crossd the eyes
Of my young play-fellow.
Grace to boot!
Of this make no conclusion, lest you say
Your queen and I are devils: yet go on;
The offences we have made you do well answer,
If you first sinnd with us and that with us
You did continue fault and that you slippd not
With any but with us.
Is he won yet?
Hell stay my lord.
At my request he would not.
Hermione, my dearest, thou never spokest
To better purpose.
Never?
Never, but once.
What! have I twice said well? when wast before?
I prithee tell me; crams with praise, and makes
As fat as tame things: one good deed dying tongueless
Slaughters a thousand waiting upon that.
Our praises are our wages: you may rides
With one soft kiss a thousand furlongs ere
With spur we beat an acre. But to the goal:
My last good deed was to entreat his stay:
What was my first? it has an elder sister,
Or I mistake you: O, would her name were Grace!
But once before I spoke to the purpose: when?
Nay, let me havet; I long.
Why, that was when
Three crabbed months had sourd themselves to death,
Ere I could make thee open thy white hand
And clap thyself my love: then didst thou utter
I am yours for ever.
Tis grace indeed.
Why, lo you now, I have spoke to the purpose twice:
The one for ever earnd a royal husband;
The other for some while a friend.
[Aside]Too hot, too hot!
To mingle friendship far is mingling bloods.
I have tremor cordis on me: my heart dances;
But not for joy; not joy. This entertainment
May a free face put on, derive a liberty
From heartiness, from bounty, fertile bosom,
And well become the agent; t may, I grant;
But to be paddling palms and pinching fingers,
As now they are, and making practised smiles,
As in a looking-glass, and then to sigh, as twere
The mort o the deer; O, that is entertainment
My bosom likes not, nor my brows! Mamillius,
Art thou my boy?
Ay, my good lord.
I fecks!
Why, thats my bawcock. What, hast
smutchd thy nose?
They say it is a copy out of mine. Come, captain,
We must be neat; not neat, but cleanly, captain:
And yet the steer, the heifer and the calf
Are all calld neat.--Still virginalling
Upon his palm!--How now, you wanton calf!
Art thou my calf?
Yes, if you will, my lord.
Thou wantst a rough pash and the shoots that I have,
To be full like me: yet they say we are
Almost as like as eggs; women say so,
That will say anything but were they false
As oer-dyed blacks, as wind, as waters, false
As dice are to be wishd by one that fixes
No bourn twixt his and mine, yet were it true
To say this boy were like me. Come, sir page,
Look on me with your welkin eye: sweet villain!
Most dearst! my collop! Can thy dam?--mayt be?--
Affection! thy intention stabs the centre:
Thou dost make possible things not so held,
Communicatest with dreams;--how can this be?--
With whats unreal thou coactive art,
And fellowst nothing: then tis very credent
Thou mayst co-join with something; and thou dost,
And that beyond commission, and I find it,
And that to the infection of my brains
And hardening of my brows.
What means Sicilia?
He something seems unsettled.
How, my lord!
What cheer? how ist with you, best brother?
You look as if you held a brow of much distraction
Are you moved, my lord?
No, in good earnest.
How sometimes nature will betray its folly,
Its tenderness, and make itself a pastime
To harder bosoms! Looking on the lines
Of my boys face, methoughts I did recoil
Twenty-three years, and saw myself unbreechd,
In my green velvet coat, my dagger muzzled,
Lest it should bite its master, and so prove,
As ornaments oft do, too dangerous:
How like, methought, I then was to this kernel,
This squash, this gentleman. Mine honest friend,
Will you take eggs for money?
No, my lord, Ill fight.
You will! why, happy man bes dole! My brother,
Are you so fond of your young prince as we
Do seem to be of ours?
If at home, sir,
Hes all my exercise, my mirth, my matter,
Now my sworn friend and then mine enemy,
My parasite, my soldier, statesman, all:
He makes a Julys day short as December,
And with his varying childness cures in me
Thoughts that would thick my blood.
So stands this squire
Officed with me: we two will walk, my lord,
And leave you to your graver steps. Hermione,
How thou lovest us, show in our brothers welcome;
Let what is dear in Sicily be cheap:
Next to thyself and my young rover, hes
Apparent to my heart.
If you would seek us,
We are yours i the garden: shalls attend you there?
To your own bents dispose you: youll be found,
Be you beneath the sky.
Aside
I am angling now,
Though you perceive me not how I give line.
Go to, go to!
How she holds up the neb, the bill to him!
And arms her with the boldness of a wife
To her allowing husband!
Exeunt POLIXENES, HERMIONE, and Attendants
Gone already!
Inch-thick, knee-deep, oer head and
ears a forkd one!
Go, play, boy, play: thy mother plays, and I
Play too, but so disgraced a part, whose issue
Will hiss me to my grave: contempt and clamour
Will be my knell. Go, play, boy, play.
There have been,
Or I am much deceived, cuckolds ere now;
And many a man there is, even at this present,
Now while I speak this, holds his wife by the arm,
That little thinks she has been sluiced ins absence
And his pond fishd by his next neighbour, by
Sir Smile, his neighbour: nay, theres comfort int
Whiles other men have gates and those gates opend,
As mine, against their will. Should all despair
That have revolted wives, the tenth of mankind
Would hang themselves. Physic fort there is none;
It is a bawdy planet, that will strike
Where tis predominant; and tis powerful, think it,
From east, west, north and south: be it concluded,
No barricado for a belly; knowt;
It will let in and out the enemy
With bag and baggage: many thousand ons
Have the disease, and feelt not. How now, boy!
I am like you, they say.
Why thats some comfort. What, Camillo there?
Ay, my good lord.
Go play, Mamillius; thourt an honest man.
Exit MAMILLIUS
Camillo, this great sir will yet stay longer.
You had much ado to make his anchor hold:
When you cast out, it still came home.
Didst note it?
He would not stay at your petitions: made
His business more material.
Didst perceive it?
Aside
Theyre here with me already, whispering, rounding
Sicilia is a so-forth: tis far gone,
When I shall gust it last. How camet, Camillo,
That he did stay?
At the good queens entreaty.
At the queens bet: good should be pertinent
But, so it is, it is not. Was this taken
By any understanding pate but thine?
For thy conceit is soaking, will draw in
More than the common blocks: not noted, ist,
But of the finer natures? by some severals
Of head-piece extraordinary? lower messes
Perchance are to this business purblind? say.
Business, my lord! I think most understand
Bohemia stays here longer.
Ha!
Stays here longer.
Ay, but why?
To satisfy your highness and the entreaties
Of our most gracious mistress.
Satisfy!
The entreaties of your mistress! satisfy!
Let that suffice. I have trusted thee, Camillo,
With all the nearest things to my heart, as well
My chamber-councils, wherein, priest-like, thou
Hast cleansed my bosom, I from thee departed
Thy penitent reformd: but we have been
Deceived in thy integrity, deceived
In that which seems so.
Be it forbid, my lord!
To bide upont, thou art not honest, or,
If thou inclinest that way, thou art a coward,
Which hoxes honesty behind, restraining
From course required; or else thou must be counted
A servant grafted in my serious trust
And therein negligent; or else a fool
That seest a game playd home, the rich stake drawn,
And takest it all for jest.
My gracious lord,
I may be negligent, foolish and fearful;
In every one of these no man is free,
But that his negligence, his folly, fear,
Among the infinite doings of the world,
Sometime puts forth. In your affairs, my lord,
If ever I were wilful-negligent,
It was my folly; if industriously
I playd the fool, it was my negligence,
Not weighing well the end; if ever fearful
To do a thing, where I the issue doubted,
Where of the execution did cry out
Against the non-performance, twas a fear
Which oft infects the wisest: these, my lord,
Are such allowd infirmities that honesty
Is never free of. But, beseech your grace,
Be plainer with me; let me know my trespass
By its own visage: if I then deny it,
Tis none of mine.
Ha not you seen, Camillo,--
But thats past doubt, you have, or your eye-glass
Is thicker than a cuckolds horn,--or heard,--
For to a vision so apparent rumour
Cannot be mute,--or thought,--for cogitation
Resides not in that man that does not think,--
My wife is slippery? If thou wilt confess,
Or else be impudently negative,
To have nor eyes nor ears nor thought, then say
My wifes a hobby-horse, deserves a name
As rank as any flax-wench that puts to
Before her troth-plight: sayt and justifyt.
I would not be a stander-by to hear
My sovereign mistress clouded so, without
My present vengeance taken: shrew my heart,
You never spoke what did become you less
Than this; which to reiterate were sin
As deep as that, though true.
Is whispering nothing?
Is leaning cheek to cheek? is meeting noses?
Kissing with inside lip? stopping the career
Of laughing with a sigh?--a note infallible
Of breaking honesty--horsing foot on foot?
Skulking in corners? wishing clocks more swift?
Hours, minutes? noon, midnight? and all eyes
Blind with the pin and web but theirs, theirs only,
That would unseen be wicked? is this nothing?
Why, then the world and all thats int is nothing;
The covering sky is nothing; Bohemia nothing;
My wife is nothing; nor nothing have these nothings,
If this be nothing.
Good my lord, be cured
Of this diseased opinion, and betimes;
For tis most dangerous.
Say it be, tis true.
No, no, my lord.
It is; you lie, you lie:
I say thou liest, Camillo, and I hate thee,
Pronounce thee a gross lout, a mindless slave,
Or else a hovering temporizer, that
Canst with thine eyes at once see good and evil,
Inclining to them both: were my wifes liver
Infected as her life, she would not live
The running of one glass.
Who does infect her?
Why, he that wears her like a medal, hanging
About his neck, Bohemia: who, if I
Had servants true about me, that bare eyes
To see alike mine honour as their profits,
Their own particular thrifts, they would do that
Which should undo more doing: ay, and thou,
His cupbearer,--whom I from meaner form
Have benched and reared to worship, who mayst see
Plainly as heaven sees earth and earth sees heaven,
How I am galled,--mightst bespice a cup,
To give mine enemy a lasting wink;
Which draught to me were cordial.
Sir, my lord,
I could do this, and that with no rash potion,
But with a lingering dram that should not work
Maliciously like poison: but I cannot
Believe this crack to be in my dread mistress,
So sovereignly being honourable.
I have loved thee,--
Make that thy question, and go rot!
Dost think I am so muddy, so unsettled,
To appoint myself in this vexation, sully
The purity and whiteness of my sheets,
Which to preserve is sleep, which being spotted
Is goads, thorns, nettles, tails of wasps,
Give scandal to the blood o the prince my son,
Who I do think is mine and love as mine,
Without ripe moving tot? Would I do this?
Could man so blench?
I must believe you, sir:
I do; and will fetch off Bohemia fort;
Provided that, when hes removed, your highness
Will take again your queen as yours at first,
Even for your sons sake; and thereby for sealing
The injury of tongues in courts and kingdoms
Known and allied to yours.
Thou dost advise me
Even so as I mine own course have set down:
Ill give no blemish to her honour, none.
My lord,
Go then; and with a countenance as clear
As friendship wears at feasts, keep with Bohemia
And with your queen. I am his cupbearer:
If from me he have wholesome beverage,
Account me not your servant.
This is all:
Dot and thou hast the one half of my heart;
Dot not, thou splitst thine own.
Ill dot, my lord.
I will seem friendly, as thou hast advised me.
Exit
O miserable lady! But, for me,
What case stand I in? I must be the poisoner
Of good Polixenes; and my ground to dot
Is the obedience to a master, one
Who in rebellion with himself will have
All that are his so too. To do this deed,
Promotion follows. If I could find example
Of thousands that had struck anointed kings
And flourishd after, Ild not dot; but since
Nor brass nor stone nor parchment bears not one,
Let villany itself forsweart. I must
Forsake the court: to dot, or no, is certain
To me a break-neck. Happy star, reign now!
Here comes Bohemia.
Re-enter POLIXENES
This is strange: methinks
My favour here begins to warp. Not speak?
Good day, Camillo.
Hail, most royal sir!
What is the news i the court?
None rare, my lord.
The king hath on him such a countenance
As he had lost some province and a region
Loved as he loves himself: even now I met him
With customary compliment; when he,
Wafting his eyes to the contrary and falling
A lip of much contempt, speeds from me and
So leaves me to consider what is breeding
That changeth thus his manners.
I dare not know, my lord.
How! dare not! do not. Do you know, and dare not?
Be intelligent to me: tis thereabouts;
For, to yourself, what you do know, you must.
And cannot say, you dare not. Good Camillo,
Your changed complexions are to me a mirror
Which shows me mine changed too; for I must be
A party in this alteration, finding
Myself thus alterd with t.
There is a sickness
Which puts some of us in distemper, but
I cannot name the disease; and it is caught
Of you that yet are well.
How! caught of me!
Make me not sighted like the basilisk:
I have lookd on thousands, who have sped the better
By my regard, but killd none so. Camillo,--
As you are certainly a gentleman, thereto
Clerk-like experienced, which no less adorns
Our gentry than our parents noble names,
In whose success we are gentle,--I beseech you,
If you know aught which does behove my knowledge
Thereof to be informd, imprisont not
In ignorant concealment.
I may not answer.
A sickness caught of me, and yet I well!
I must be answerd. Dost thou hear, Camillo,
I conjure thee, by all the parts of man
Which honour does acknowledge, whereof the least
Is not this suit of mine, that thou declare
What incidency thou dost guess of harm
Is creeping toward me; how far off, how near;
Which way to be prevented, if to be;
If not, how best to bear it.
Sir, I will tell you;
Since I am charged in honour and by him
That I think honourable: therefore mark my counsel,
Which must be even as swiftly followd as
I mean to utter it, or both yourself and me
Cry lost, and so good night!
On, good Camillo.
I am appointed him to murder you.
By whom, Camillo?
By the king.
For what?
He thinks, nay, with all confidence he swears,
As he had seent or been an instrument
To vice you tot, that you have touchd his queen
Forbiddenly.
O, then my best blood turn
To an infected jelly and my name
Be yoked with his that did betray the Best!
Turn then my freshest reputation to
A savour that may strike the dullest nostril
Where I arrive, and my approach be shunnd,
Nay, hated too, worse than the greatst infection
That eer was heard or read!
Swear his thought over
By each particular star in heaven and
By all their influences, you may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon
As or by oath remove or counsel shake
The fabric of his folly, whose foundation
Is piled upon his faith and will continue
The standing of his body.
How should this grow?
I know not: but I am sure tis safer to
Avoid whats grown than question how tis born.
If therefore you dare trust my honesty,
That lies enclosed in this trunk which you
Shall bear along impawnd, away to-night!
Your followers I will whisper to the business,
And will by twos and threes at several posterns
Clear them o the city. For myself, Ill put
My fortunes to your service, which are here
By this discovery lost. Be not uncertain;
For, by the honour of my parents, I
Have utterd truth: which if you seek to prove,
I dare not stand by; nor shall you be safer
Than one condemnd by the kings own mouth, thereon
His execution sworn.
I do believe thee:
I saw his heart in s face. Give me thy hand:
Be pilot to me and thy places shall
Still neighbour mine. My ships are ready and
My people did expect my hence departure
Two days ago. This jealousy
Is for a precious creature: as shes rare,
Must it be great, and as his persons mighty,
Must it be violent, and as he does conceive
He is dishonourd by a man which ever
Professd to him, why, his revenges must
In that be made more bitter. Fear oershades me:
Good expedition be my friend, and comfort
The gracious queen, part of his theme, but nothing
Of his ill-taen suspicion! Come, Camillo;
I will respect thee as a father if
Thou bearst my life off hence: let us avoid.
It is in mine authority to command
The keys of all the posterns: please your highness
To take the urgent hour. Come, sir, away.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. A room in LEONTES palace.
Enter HERMIONE, MAMILLIUS, and Ladies
Take the boy to you: he so troubles me,
Tis past enduring.
Come, my gracious lord,
Shall I be your playfellow?
No, Ill none of you.
Why, my sweet lord?
Youll kiss me hard and speak to me as if
I were a baby still. I love you better.
And why so, my lord?
Not for because
Your brows are blacker; yet black brows, they say,
Become some women best, so that there be not
Too much hair there, but in a semicircle
Or a half-moon made with a pen.
Who taught you this?
I learnt it out of womens faces. Pray now
What colour are your eyebrows?
Blue, my lord.
Nay, thats a mock: I have seen a ladys nose
That has been blue, but not her eyebrows.
Hark ye;
The queen your mother rounds apace: we shall
Present our services to a fine new prince
One of these days; and then yould wanton with us,
If we would have you.
She is spread of late
Into a goodly bulk: good time encounter her!
What wisdom stirs amongst you? Come, sir, now
I am for you again: pray you, sit by us,
And tell s a tale.
Merry or sad shallt be?
As merry as you will.
A sad tales best for winter: I have one
Of sprites and goblins.
Lets have that, good sir.
Come on, sit down: come on, and do your best
To fright me with your sprites; youre powerful at it.
There was a man--
Nay, come, sit down; then on.
Dwelt by a churchyard: I will tell it softly;
Yond crickets shall not hear it.
Come on, then,
And givet me in mine ear.
Enter LEONTES, with ANTIGONUS, Lords and others
Was he met there? his train? Camillo with him?
Behind the tuft of pines I met them; never
Saw I men scour so on their way: I eyed them
Even to their ships.
How blest am I
In my just censure, in my true opinion!
Alack, for lesser knowledge! how accursed
In being so blest! There may be in the cup
A spider steepd, and one may drink, depart,
And yet partake no venom, for his knowledge
Is not infected: but if one present
The abhorrd ingredient to his eye, make known
How he hath drunk, he cracks his gorge, his sides,
With violent hefts. I have drunk,
and seen the spider.
Camillo was his help in this, his pander:
There is a plot against my life, my crown;
Alls true that is mistrusted: that false villain
Whom I employd was pre-employd by him:
He has discoverd my design, and I
Remain a pinchd thing; yea, a very trick
For them to play at will. How came the posterns
So easily open?
By his great authority;
Which often hath no less prevaild than so
On your command.
I knowt too well.
Give me the boy: I am glad you did not nurse him:
Though he does bear some signs of me, yet you
Have too much blood in him.
What is this? sport?
Bear the boy hence; he shall not come about her;
Away with him! and let her sport herself
With that shes big with; for tis Polixenes
Has made thee swell thus.
But Ild say he had not,
And Ill be sworn you would believe my saying,
Howeer you lean to the nayward.
You, my lords,
Look on her, mark her well; be but about
To say she is a goodly lady, and
The justice of your bearts will thereto add
Tis pity shes not honest, honourable:
Praise her but for this her without-door form,
Which on my faith deserves high speech, and straight
The shrug, the hum or ha, these petty brands
That calumny doth use--O, I am out--
That mercy does, for calumny will sear
Virtue itself: these shrugs, these hums and has,
When you have said shes goodly, come between
Ere you can say shes honest: but be t known,
From him that has most cause to grieve it should be,
Shes an adulteress.
Should a villain say so,
The most replenishd villain in the world,
He were as much more villain: you, my lord,
Do but mistake.
You have mistook, my lady,
Polixenes for Leontes: O thou thing!
Which Ill not call a creature of thy place,
Lest barbarism, making me the precedent,
Should a like language use to all degrees
And mannerly distinguishment leave out
Betwixt the prince and beggar: I have said
Shes an adulteress; I have said with whom:
More, shes a traitor and Camillo is
A federary with her, and one that knows
What she should shame to know herself
But with her most vile principal, that shes
A bed-swerver, even as bad as those
That vulgars give boldst titles, ay, and privy
To this their late escape.
No, by my life.
Privy to none of this. How will this grieve you,
When you shall come to clearer knowledge, that
You thus have publishd me! Gentle my lord,
You scarce can right me throughly then to say
You did mistake.
No; if I mistake
In those foundations which I build upon,
The centre is not big enough to bear
A school-boys top. Away with her! to prison!
He who shall speak for her is afar off guilty
But that he speaks.
Theres some ill planet reigns:
I must be patient till the heavens look
With an aspect more favourable. Good my lords,
I am not prone to weeping, as our sex
Commonly are; the want of which vain dew
Perchance shall dry your pities: but I have
That honourable grief lodged here which burns
Worse than tears drown: beseech you all, my lords,
With thoughts so qualified as your charities
Shall best instruct you, measure me; and so
The kings will be performd!
Shall I be heard?
Who ist that goes with me? Beseech your highness,
My women may be with me; for you see
My plight requires it. Do not weep, good fools;
There is no cause: when you shall know your mistress
Has deserved prison, then abound in tears
As I come out: this action I now go on
Is for my better grace. Adieu, my lord:
I never wishd to see you sorry; now
I trust I shall. My women, come; you have leave.
Go, do our bidding; hence!
Exit HERMIONE, guarded; with Ladies
Beseech your highness, call the queen again.
Be certain what you do, sir, lest your justice
Prove violence; in the which three great ones suffer,
Yourself, your queen, your son.
For her, my lord,
I dare my life lay down and will dot, sir,
Please you to accept it, that the queen is spotless
I the eyes of heaven and to you; I mean,
In this which you accuse her.
If it prove
Shes otherwise, Ill keep my stables where
I lodge my wife; Ill go in couples with her;
Than when I feel and see her no farther trust her;
For every inch of woman in the world,
Ay, every dram of womans flesh is false, If she be.
Hold your peaces.
Good my lord,--
It is for you we speak, not for ourselves:
You are abused and by some putter-on
That will be damnd fort; would I knew the villain,
I would land-damn him. Be she honour-flawd,
I have three daughters; the eldest is eleven
The second and the third, nine, and some five;
If this prove true, theyll pay fort:
by mine honour,
Ill geld em all; fourteen they shall not see,
To bring false generations: they are co-heirs;
And I had rather glib myself than they
Should not produce fair issue.
Cease; no more.
You smell this business with a sense as cold
As is a dead mans nose: but I do seet and feelt
As you feel doing thus; and see withal
The instruments that feel.
If it be so,
We need no grave to bury honesty:
Theres not a grain of it the face to sweeten
Of the whole dungy earth.
What! lack I credit?
I had rather you did lack than I, my lord,
Upon this ground; and more it would content me
To have her honour true than your suspicion,
Be blamed fort how you might.
Why, what need we
Commune with you of this, but rather follow
Our forceful instigation? Our prerogative
Calls not your counsels, but our natural goodness
Imparts this; which if you, or stupefied
Or seeming so in skill, cannot or will not
Relish a truth like us, inform yourselves
We need no more of your advice: the matter,
The loss, the gain, the ordering ont, is all
Properly ours.
And I wish, my liege,
You had only in your silent judgment tried it,
Without more overture.
How could that be?
Either thou art most ignorant by age,
Or thou wert born a fool. Camillos flight,
Added to their familiarity,
Which was as gross as ever touchd conjecture,
That lackd sight only, nought for approbation
But only seeing, all other circumstances
Made up to the deed, doth push on this proceeding:
Yet, for a greater confirmation,
For in an act of this importance twere
Most piteous to be wild, I have dispatchd in post
To sacred Delphos, to Apollos temple,
Cleomenes and Dion, whom you know
Of stuffd sufficiency: now from the oracle
They will bring all; whose spiritual counsel had,
Shall stop or spur me. Have I done well?
Well done, my lord.
Though I am satisfied and need no more
Than what I know, yet shall the oracle
Give rest to the minds of others, such as he
Whose ignorant credulity will not
Come up to the truth. So have we thought it good
From our free person she should be confined,
Lest that the treachery of the two fled hence
Be left her to perform. Come, follow us;
We are to speak in public; for this business
Will raise us all.
[Aside]
To laughter, as I take it,
If the good truth were known.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A prison.
Enter PAULINA, a Gentleman, and Attendants
The keeper of the prison, call to him;
let him have knowledge who I am.
Exit Gentleman
Good lady,
No court in Europe is too good for thee;
What dost thou then in prison?
Re-enter Gentleman, with the Gaoler
Now, good sir,
You know me, do you not?
For a worthy lady
And one whom much I honour.
Pray you then,
Conduct me to the queen.
I may not, madam:
To the contrary I have express commandment.
Heres ado,
To lock up honesty and honour from
The access of gentle visitors!
Ist lawful, pray you,
To see her women? any of them? Emilia?
So please you, madam,
To put apart these your attendants, I
Shall bring Emilia forth.
I pray now, call her.
Withdraw yourselves.
Exeunt Gentleman and Attendants
And, madam,
I must be present at your conference.
Well, bet so, prithee.
Exit Gaoler
Heres such ado to make no stain a stain
As passes colouring.
Re-enter Gaoler, with EMILIA
Dear gentlewoman,
How fares our gracious lady?
As well as one so great and so forlorn
May hold together: on her frights and griefs,
Which never tender lady hath born greater,
She is something before her time deliverd.
A boy?
A daughter, and a goodly babe,
Lusty and like to live: the queen receives
Much comfort int; says My poor prisoner,
I am innocent as you.
I dare be sworn
These dangerous unsafe lunes i the king,
beshrew them!
He must be told ont, and he shall: the office
Becomes a woman best; Ill taket upon me:
If I prove honey-mouthd let my tongue blister
And never to my red-lookd anger be
The trumpet any more. Pray you, Emilia,
Commend my best obedience to the queen:
If she dares trust me with her little babe,
Ill showt the king and undertake to be
Her advocate to the loudst. We do not know
How he may soften at the sight o the child:
The silence often of pure innocence
Persuades when speaking fails.
Most worthy madam,
Your honour and your goodness is so evident
That your free undertaking cannot miss
A thriving issue: there is no lady living
So meet for this great errand. Please your ladyship
To visit the next room, Ill presently
Acquaint the queen of your most noble offer;
Who  but to-day hammerd of this design,
But durst not tempt a minister of honour,
Lest she should be denied.
Tell her, Emilia.
Ill use that tongue I have: if wit flow fromt
As boldness from my bosom, let t not be doubted
I shall do good.
Now be you blest for it!
Ill to the queen: please you,
come something nearer.
Madam, ift please the queen to send the babe,
I know not what I shall incur to pass it,
Having no warrant.
You need not fear it, sir:
This child was prisoner to the womb and is
By law and process of great nature thence
Freed and enfranchised, not a party to
The anger of the king nor guilty of,
If any be, the trespass of the queen.
I do believe it.
Do not you fear: upon mine honour,
I will stand betwixt you and danger.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A room in LEONTES palace.
Enter LEONTES, ANTIGONUS, Lords, and Servants
Nor night nor day no rest: it is but weakness
To bear the matter thus; mere weakness. If
The cause were not in being,--part o the cause,
She the adulteress; for the harlot king
Is quite beyond mine arm, out of the blank
And level of my brain, plot-proof; but she
I can hook to me: say that she were gone,
Given to the fire, a moiety of my rest
Might come to me again. Whos there?
My lord?
How does the boy?
He took good rest to-night;
Tis hoped his sickness is discharged.
To see his nobleness!
Conceiving the dishonour of his mother,
He straight declined, droopd, took it deeply,
Fastend and fixd the shame ont in himself,
Threw off his spirit, his appetite, his sleep,
And downright languishd. Leave me solely: go,
See how he fares.
Exit Servant
Fie, fie! no thought of him:
The thought of my revenges that way
Recoil upon me: in himself too mighty,
And in his parties, his alliance; let him be
Until a time may serve: for present vengeance,
Take it on her. Camillo and Polixenes
Laugh at me, make their pastime at my sorrow:
They should not laugh if I could reach them, nor
Shall she within my power.
Enter PAULINA, with a child
You must not enter.
Nay, rather, good my lords, be second to me:
Fear you his tyrannous passion more, alas,
Than the queens life? a gracious innocent soul,
More free than he is jealous.
Thats enough.
Madam, he hath not slept tonight; commanded
None should come at him.
Not so hot, good sir:
I come to bring him sleep. Tis such as you,
That creep like shadows by him and do sigh
At each his needless heavings, such as you
Nourish the cause of his awaking: I
Do come with words as medicinal as true,
Honest as either, to purge him of that humour
That presses him from sleep.
What noise there, ho?
No noise, my lord; but needful conference
About some gossips for your highness.
How!
Away with that audacious lady! Antigonus,
I charged thee that she should not come about me:
I knew she would.
I told her so, my lord,
On your displeasures peril and on mine,
She should not visit you.
What, canst not rule her?
From all dishonesty he can: in this,
Unless he take the course that you have done,
Commit me for committing honour, trust it,
He shall not rule me.
La you now, you hear:
When she will take the rein I let her run;
But shell not stumble.
Good my liege, I come;
And, I beseech you, hear me, who profess
Myself your loyal servant, your physician,
Your most obedient counsellor, yet that dare
Less appear so in comforting your evils,
Than such as most seem yours: I say, I come
From your good queen.
Good queen!
Good queen, my lord,
Good queen; I say good queen;
And would by combat make her good, so were I
A man, the worst about you.
Force her hence.
Let him that makes but trifles of his eyes
First hand me: on mine own accord Ill off;
But first Ill do my errand. The good queen,
For she is good, hath brought you forth a daughter;
Here tis; commends it to your blessing.
Laying down the child
Out!
A mankind witch! Hence with her, out o door:
A most intelligencing bawd!
Not so:
I am as ignorant in that as you
In so entitling me, and no less honest
Than you are mad; which is enough, Ill warrant,
As this world goes, to pass for honest.
Traitors!
Will you not push her out? Give her the bastard.
Thou dotard! thou art woman-tired, unroosted
By thy dame Partlet here. Take up the bastard;
Taket up, I say; givet to thy crone.
For ever
Unvenerable be thy hands, if thou
Takest up the princess by that forced baseness
Which he has put upont!
He dreads his wife.
So I would you did; then twere past all doubt
Yould call your children yours.
A nest of traitors!
I am none, by this good light.
Nor I, nor any
But one thats here, and thats himself, for he
The sacred honour of himself, his queens,
His hopeful sons, his babes, betrays to slander,
Whose sting is sharper than the swords;
and will not--
For, as the case now stands, it is a curse
He cannot be compelld tot--once remove
The root of his opinion, which is rotten
As ever oak or stone was sound.
A callat
Of boundless tongue, who late hath beat her husband
And now baits me! This brat is none of mine;
It is the issue of Polixenes:
Hence with it, and together with the dam
Commit them to the fire!
It is yours;
And, might we lay the old proverb to your charge,
So like you, tis the worse. Behold, my lords,
Although the print be little, the whole matter
And copy of the father, eye, nose, lip,
The trick ofs frown, his forehead, nay, the valley,
The pretty dimples of his chin and cheek,
His smiles,
The very mould and frame of hand, nail, finger:
And thou, good goddess Nature, which hast made it
So like to him that got it, if thou hast
The ordering of the mind too, mongst all colours
No yellow int, lest she suspect, as he does,
Her children not her husbands!
A gross hag
And, lozel, thou art worthy to be hangd,
That wilt not stay her tongue.
Hang all the husbands
That cannot do that feat, youll leave yourself
Hardly one subject.
Once more, take her hence.
A most unworthy and unnatural lord
Can do no more.
Ill ha thee burnt.
I care not:
It is an heretic that makes the fire,
Not she which burns int. Ill not call you tyrant;
But this most cruel usage of your queen,
Not able to produce more accusation
Than your own weak-hinged fancy, something savours
Of tyranny and will ignoble make you,
Yea, scandalous to the world.
On your allegiance,
Out of the chamber with her! Were I a tyrant,
Where were her life? she durst not call me so,
If she did know me one. Away with her!
I pray you, do not push me; Ill be gone.
Look to your babe, my lord; tis yours:
Jove send her
A better guiding spirit! What needs these hands?
