You, that are thus so tender oer his follies,
Will never do him good, not one of you.
So, so: farewell; we are gone.
Exit
Thou, traitor, hast set on thy wife to this.
My child? away witht! Even thou, that hast
A heart so tender oer it, take it hence
And see it instantly consumed with fire;
Even thou and none but thou. Take it up straight:
Within this hour bring me word tis done,
And by good testimony, or Ill seize thy life,
With what thou else callst thine. If thou refuse
And wilt encounter with my wrath, say so;
The bastard brains with these my proper hands
Shall I dash out. Go, take it to the fire;
For thou setst on thy wife.
I did not, sir:
These lords, my noble fellows, if they please,
Can clear me int.
We can: my royal liege,
He is not guilty of her coming hither.
Youre liars all.
Beseech your highness, give us better credit:
We have always truly served you, and beseech you
So to esteem of us, and on our knees we beg,
As recompense of our dear services
Past and to come, that you do change this purpose,
Which being so horrible, so bloody, must
Lead on to some foul issue: we all kneel.
I am a feather for each wind that blows:
Shall I live on to see this bastard kneel
And call me father? better burn it now
Than curse it then. But be it; let it live.
It shall not neither. You, sir, come you hither;
You that have been so tenderly officious
With Lady Margery, your midwife there,
To save this bastards life,--for tis a bastard,
So sure as this beards grey,
--what will you adventure
To save this brats life?
Any thing, my lord,
That my ability may undergo
And nobleness impose: at least thus much:
Ill pawn the little blood which I have left
To save the innocent: any thing possible.
It shall be possible. Swear by this sword
Thou wilt perform my bidding.
I will, my lord.
Mark and perform it, seest thou! for the fail
Of any point int shall not only be
Death to thyself but to thy lewd-tongued wife,
Whom for this time we pardon. We enjoin thee,
As thou art liege-man to us, that thou carry
This female bastard hence and that thou bear it
To some remote and desert place quite out
Of our dominions, and that there thou leave it,
Without more mercy, to its own protection
And favour of the climate. As by strange fortune
It came to us, I do in justice charge thee,
On thy souls peril and thy bodys torture,
That thou commend it strangely to some place
Where chance may nurse or end it. Take it up.
I swear to do this, though a present death
Had been more merciful. Come on, poor babe:
Some powerful spirit instruct the kites and ravens
To be thy nurses! Wolves and bears, they say
Casting their savageness aside have done
Like offices of pity. Sir, be prosperous
In more than this deed does require! And blessing
Against this cruelty fight on thy side,
Poor thing, condemnd to loss!
Exit with the child
No, Ill not rear
Anothers issue.
Enter a Servant
Please your highness, posts
From those you sent to the oracle are come
An hour since: Cleomenes and Dion,
Being well arrived from Delphos, are both landed,
Hasting to the court.
So please you, sir, their speed
Hath been beyond account.
Twenty-three days
They have been absent: tis good speed; foretells
The great Apollo suddenly will have
The truth of this appear. Prepare you, lords;
Summon a session, that we may arraign
Our most disloyal lady, for, as she hath
Been publicly accused, so shall she have
A just and open trial. While she lives
My heart will be a burthen to me. Leave me,
And think upon my bidding.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. A sea-port in Sicilia.
Enter CLEOMENES and DION
The climates delicate, the air most sweet,
Fertile the isle, the temple much surpassing
The common praise it bears.
I shall report,
For most it caught me, the celestial habits,
Methinks I so should term them, and the reverence
Of the grave wearers. O, the sacrifice!
How ceremonious, solemn and unearthly
It was i the offering!
But of all, the burst
And the ear-deafening voice o the oracle,
Kin to Joves thunder, so surprised my sense.
That I was nothing.
If the event o the journey
Prove as successful to the queen,--O bet so!--
As it hath been to us rare, pleasant, speedy,
The time is worth the use ont.
Great Apollo
Turn all to the best! These proclamations,
So forcing faults upon Hermione,
I little like.
The violent carriage of it
Will clear or end the business: when the oracle,
Thus by Apollos great divine seald up,
Shall the contents discover, something rare
Even then will rush to knowledge. Go: fresh horses!
And gracious be the issue!
Exeunt
SCENE II. A court of Justice.
Enter LEONTES, Lords, and Officers
This sessions, to our great grief we pronounce,
Even pushes gainst our heart: the party tried
The daughter of a king, our wife, and one
Of us too much beloved. Let us be cleard
Of being tyrannous, since we so openly
Proceed in justice, which shall have due course,
Even to the guilt or the purgation.
Produce the prisoner.
It is his highness pleasure that the queen
Appear in person here in court. Silence!
Enter HERMIONE guarded; PAULINA and Ladies attending
Read the indictment.
[Reads]            Hermione, queen to the worthy
Leontes, king of Sicilia, thou art here accused and
arraigned of high treason, in committing adultery
with Polixenes, king of Bohemia, and conspiring
with Camillo to take away the life of our sovereign
lord the king, thy royal husband: the pretence
whereof being by circumstances partly laid open,
thou, Hermione, contrary to the faith and allegiance
of a true subject, didst counsel and aid them, for
their better safety, to fly away by night.
Since what I am to say must be but that
Which contradicts my accusation and
The testimony on my part no other
But what comes from myself, it shall scarce boot me
To say not guilty: mine integrity
Being counted falsehood, shall, as I express it,
Be so received. But thus: if powers divine
Behold our human actions, as they do,
I doubt not then but innocence shall make
False accusation blush and tyranny
Tremble at patience. You, my lord, best know,
Who least will seem to do so, my past life
Hath been as continent, as chaste, as true,
As I am now unhappy; which is more
Than history can pattern, though devised
And playd to take spectators. For behold me
A fellow of the royal bed, which owe
A moiety of the throne a great kings daughter,
The mother to a hopeful prince, here standing
To prate and talk for life and honour fore
Who please to come and hear. For life, I prize it
As I weigh grief, which I would spare: for honour,
Tis a derivative from me to mine,
And only that I stand for. I appeal
To your own conscience, sir, before Polixenes
Came to your court, how I was in your grace,
How merited to be so; since he came,
With what encounter so uncurrent I
Have straind to appear thus: if one jot beyond
The bound of honour, or in act or will
That way inclining, hardend be the hearts
Of all that hear me, and my nearst of kin
Cry fie upon my grave!
I neer heard yet
That any of these bolder vices wanted
Less impudence to gainsay what they did
Than to perform it first.
Thats true enough;
Through tis a saying, sir, not due to me.
You will not own it.
More than mistress of
Which comes to me in name of fault, I must not
At all acknowledge. For Polixenes,
With whom I am accused, I do confess
I loved him as in honour he required,
With such a kind of love as might become
A lady like me, with a love even such,
So and no other, as yourself commanded:
Which not to have done I think had been in me
Both disobedience and ingratitude
To you and toward your friend, whose love had spoke,
Even since it could speak, from an infant, freely
That it was yours. Now, for conspiracy,
I know not how it tastes; though it be dishd
For me to try how: all I know of it
Is that Camillo was an honest man;
And why he left your court, the gods themselves,
Wotting no more than I, are ignorant.
You knew of his departure, as you know
What you have undertaen to do ins absence.
Sir,
You speak a language that I understand not:
My life stands in the level of your dreams,
Which Ill lay down.
Your actions are my dreams;
You had a bastard by Polixenes,
And I but dreamd it. As you were past all shame,--
Those of your fact are so--so past all truth:
Which to deny concerns more than avails; for as
Thy brat hath been cast out, like to itself,
No father owning it,--which is, indeed,
More criminal in thee than it,--so thou
Shalt feel our justice, in whose easiest passage
Look for no less than death.
Sir, spare your threats:
The bug which you would fright me with I seek.
To me can life be no commodity:
The crown and comfort of my life, your favour,
I do give lost; for I do feel it gone,
But know not how it went. My second joy
And first-fruits of my body, from his presence
I am barrd, like one infectious. My third comfort
Starrd most unluckily, is from my breast,
The innocent milk in its most innocent mouth,
Haled out to murder: myself on every post
Proclaimed a strumpet: with immodest hatred
The child-bed privilege denied, which longs
To women of all fashion; lastly, hurried
Here to this place, i the open air, before
I have got strength of limit. Now, my liege,
Tell me what blessings I have here alive,
That I should fear to die? Therefore proceed.
But yet hear this: mistake me not; no life,
I prize it not a straw, but for mine honour,
Which I would free, if I shall be condemnd
Upon surmises, all proofs sleeping else
But what your jealousies awake, I tell you
Tis rigor and not law. Your honours all,
I do refer me to the oracle:
Apollo be my judge!
This your request
Is altogether just: therefore bring forth,
And in Apollos name, his oracle.
Exeunt certain Officers
The Emperor of Russia was my father:
O that he were alive, and here beholding
His daughters trial! that he did but see
The flatness of my misery, yet with eyes
Of pity, not revenge!
Re-enter Officers, with CLEOMENES and DION
You here shall swear upon this sword of justice,
That you, Cleomenes and Dion, have
Been both at Delphos, and from thence have brought
The seald-up oracle, by the hand deliverd
Of great Apollos priest; and that, since then,
You have not dared to break the holy seal
Nor read the secrets int.
All this we swear.
Break up the seals and read.
[Reads]Hermione is chaste;
Polixenes blameless; Camillo a true subject; Leontes
a jealous tyrant; his innocent babe truly begotten;
and the king shall live without an heir, if that
which is lost be not found.
Now blessed be the great Apollo!
Praised!
Hast thou read truth?
Ay, my lord; even so
As it is here set down.
There is no truth at all i the oracle:
The sessions shall proceed: this is mere falsehood.
Enter Servant
My lord the king, the king!
What is the business?
O sir, I shall be hated to report it!
The prince your son, with mere conceit and fear
Of the queens speed, is gone.
How! gone!
Is dead.
Apollos angry; and the heavens themselves
Do strike at my injustice.
HERMIONE swoons
How now there!
This news is mortal to the queen: look down
And see what death is doing.
Take her hence:
Her heart is but oercharged; she will recover:
I have too much believed mine own suspicion:
Beseech you, tenderly apply to her
Some remedies for life.
Exeunt PAULINA and Ladies, with HERMIONE
Apollo, pardon
My great profaneness gainst thine oracle!
Ill reconcile me to Polixenes,
New woo my queen, recall the good Camillo,
Whom I proclaim a man of truth, of mercy;
For, being transported by my jealousies
To bloody thoughts and to revenge, I chose
Camillo for the minister to poison
My friend Polixenes: which had been done,
But that the good mind of Camillo tardied
My swift command, though I with death and with
Reward did threaten and encourage him,
Not doing t and being done: he, most humane
And filld with honour, to my kingly guest
Unclaspd my practise, quit his fortunes here,
Which you knew great, and to the hazard
Of all encertainties himself commended,
No richer than his honour: how he glisters
Thorough my rust! and how his pity
Does my deeds make the blacker!
Re-enter PAULINA
Woe the while!
O, cut my lace, lest my heart, cracking it,
Break too.
What fit is this, good lady?
What studied torments, tyrant, hast for me?
What wheels? racks? fires? what flaying? boiling?
In leads or oils? what old or newer torture
Must I receive, whose every word deserves
To taste of thy most worst? Thy tyranny
Together working with thy jealousies,
Fancies too weak for boys, too green and idle
For girls of nine, O, think what they have done
And then run mad indeed, stark mad! for all
Thy by-gone fooleries were but spices of it.
That thou betraydst Polixenes,twas nothing;
That did but show thee, of a fool, inconstant
And damnable ingrateful: nor wast much,
Thou wouldst have poisond good Camillos honour,
To have him kill a king: poor trespasses,
More monstrous standing by: whereof I reckon
The casting forth to crows thy baby-daughter
To be or none or little; though a devil
Would have shed water out of fire ere donet:
Nor ist directly laid to thee, the death
Of the young prince, whose honourable thoughts,
Thoughts high for one so tender, cleft the heart
That could conceive a gross and foolish sire
Blemishd his gracious dam: this is not, no,
Laid to thy answer: but the last,--O lords,
When I have said, cry woe! the queen, the queen,
The sweetst, dearst creatures dead,
and vengeance fort
Not droppd down yet.
The higher powers forbid!
I say shes dead; Ill sweart. If word nor oath
Prevail not, go and see: if you can bring
Tincture or lustre in her lip, her eye,
Heat outwardly or breath within, Ill serve you
As I would do the gods. But, O thou tyrant!
Do not repent these things, for they are heavier
Than all thy woes can stir; therefore betake thee
To nothing but despair. A thousand knees
Ten thousand years together, naked, fasting,
Upon a barren mountain and still winter
In storm perpetual, could not move the gods
To look that way thou wert.
Go on, go on
Thou canst not speak too much; I have deserved
All tongues to talk their bitterest.
Say no more:
Howeer the business goes, you have made fault
I the boldness of your speech.
I am sorry fort:
All faults I make, when I shall come to know them,
I do repent. Alas! I have showd too much
The rashness of a woman: he is touchd
To the noble heart. Whats gone and whats past help
Should be past grief: do not receive affliction
At my petition; I beseech you, rather
Let me be punishd, that have minded you
Of what you should forget. Now, good my liege
Sir, royal sir, forgive a foolish woman:
The love I bore your queen--lo, fool again!--
Ill speak of her no more, nor of your children;
Ill not remember you of my own lord,
Who is lost too: take your patience to you,
And Ill say nothing.
Thou didst speak but well
When most the truth; which I receive much better
Than to be pitied of thee. Prithee, bring me
To the dead bodies of my queen and son:
One grave shall be for both: upon them shall
The causes of their death appear, unto
Our shame perpetual. Once a day Ill visit
The chapel where they lie, and tears shed there
Shall be my recreation: so long as nature
Will bear up with this exercise, so long
I daily vow to use it. Come and lead me
Unto these sorrows.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Bohemia. A desert country near the sea.
Enter ANTIGONUS with a Child, and a Mariner
Thou art perfect then, our ship hath touchd upon
The deserts of Bohemia?
Ay, my lord: and fear
We have landed in ill time: the skies look grimly
And threaten present blusters. In my conscience,
The heavens with that we have in hand are angry
And frown upon s.
Their sacred wills be done! Go, get aboard;
Look to thy bark: Ill not be long before
I call upon thee.
Make your best haste, and go not
Too far i the land: tis like to be loud weather;
Besides, this place is famous for the creatures
Of prey that keep upont.
Go thou away:
Ill follow instantly.
I am glad at heart
To be so rid o the business.
Exit
Come, poor babe:
I have heard, but not believed,
the spirits o the dead
May walk again: if such thing be, thy mother
Appeard to me last night, for neer was dream
So like a waking. To me comes a creature,
Sometimes her head on one side, some another;
I never saw a vessel of like sorrow,
So filld and so becoming: in pure white robes,
Like very sanctity, she did approach
My cabin where I lay; thrice bowd before me,
And gasping to begin some speech, her eyes
Became two spouts: the fury spent, anon
Did this break-from her: Good Antigonus,
Since fate, against thy better disposition,
Hath made thy person for the thrower-out
Of my poor babe, according to thine oath,
Places remote enough are in Bohemia,
There weep and leave it crying; and, for the babe
Is counted lost for ever, Perdita,
I prithee, callt. For this ungentle business
Put on thee by my lord, thou neer shalt see
Thy wife Paulina more. And so, with shrieks
She melted into air. Affrighted much,
I did in time collect myself and thought
This was so and no slumber. Dreams are toys:
Yet for this once, yea, superstitiously,
I will be squared by this. I do believe
Hermione hath sufferd death, and that
Apollo would, this being indeed the issue
Of King Polixenes, it should here be laid,
Either for life or death, upon the earth
Of its right father. Blossom, speed thee well!
There lie, and there thy character: there these;
Which may, if fortune please, both breed thee, pretty,
And still rest thine. The storm begins; poor wretch,
That for thy mothers fault art thus exposed
To loss and what may follow! Weep I cannot,
But my heart bleeds; and most accursed am I
To be by oath enjoind to this. Farewell!
The day frowns more and more: thourt like to have
A lullaby too rough: I never saw
The heavens so dim by day. A savage clamour!
Well may I get aboard! This is the chase:
I am gone for ever.
Exit, pursued by a bear
Enter a Shepherd
I would there were no age between sixteen and
three-and-twenty, or that youth would sleep out the
rest; for there is nothing in the between but
getting wenches with child, wronging the ancientry,
stealing, fighting--Hark you now! Would any but
these boiled brains of nineteen and two-and-twenty
hunt this weather? They have scared away two of my
best sheep, which I fear the wolf will sooner find
than the master: if any where I have them, tis by
the seaside, browsing of ivy. Good luck, ant be thy
will what have we here! Mercy on s, a barne a very
pretty barne! A boy or a child, I wonder? A
pretty one; a very pretty one: sure, some scape:
though I am not bookish, yet I can read
waiting-gentlewoman in the scape. This has been
some stair-work, some trunk-work, some
behind-door-work: they were warmer that got this
than the poor thing is here. Ill take it up for
pity: yet Ill tarry till my son come; he hallooed
but even now. Whoa, ho, hoa!
Enter Clown
Hilloa, loa!
What, art so near? If thoult see a thing to talk
on when thou art dead and rotten, come hither. What
ailest thou, man?
I have seen two such sights, by sea and by land!
but I am not to say it is a sea, for it is now the
sky: betwixt the firmament and it you cannot thrust
a bodkins point.
Why, boy, how is it?
I would you did but see how it chafes, how it rages,
how it takes up the shore! but thats not the
point. O, the most piteous cry of the poor souls!
sometimes to see em, and not to see em; now the
ship boring the moon with her main-mast, and anon
swallowed with yest and froth, as yould thrust a
cork into a hogshead. And then for the
land-service, to see how the bear tore out his
shoulder-bone; how he cried to me for help and said
his name was Antigonus, a nobleman. But to make an
end of the ship, to see how the sea flap-dragoned
it: but, first, how the poor souls roared, and the
sea mocked them; and how the poor gentleman roared
and the bear mocked him, both roaring louder than
the sea or weather.
Name of mercy, when was this, boy?
Now, now: I have not winked since I saw these
sights: the men are not yet cold under water, nor
the bear half dined on the gentleman: hes at it
now.
Would I had been by, to have helped the old man!
I would you had been by the ship side, to have
helped her: there your charity would have lacked footing.
Heavy matters! heavy matters! but look thee here,
boy. Now bless thyself: thou mettest with things
dying, I with things newborn. Heres a sight for
thee; look thee, a bearing-cloth for a squires
child! look thee here; take up, take up, boy;
opent. So, lets see: it was told me I should be
rich by the fairies. This is some changeling:
opent. Whats within, boy?
Youre a made old man: if the sins of your youth
are forgiven you, youre well to live. Gold! all gold!
This is fairy gold, boy, and twill prove so: up
witht, keep it close: home, home, the next way.
We are lucky, boy; and to be so still requires
nothing but secrecy. Let my sheep go: come, good
boy, the next way home.
Go you the next way with your findings. Ill go see
if the bear be gone from the gentleman and how much
he hath eaten: they are never curst but when they
are hungry: if there be any of him left, Ill bury
it.
Thats a good deed. If thou mayest discern by that
which is left of him what he is, fetch me to the
sight of him.
Marry, will I; and you shall help to put him i the ground.
Tis a lucky day, boy, and well do good deeds ont.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I:
Enter Time, the Chorus
I, that please some, try all, both joy and terror
Of good and bad, that makes and unfolds error,
Now take upon me, in the name of Time,
To use my wings. Impute it not a crime
To me or my swift passage, that I slide
Oer sixteen years and leave the growth untried
Of that wide gap, since it is in my power
To oerthrow law and in one self-born hour
To plant and oerwhelm custom. Let me pass
The same I am, ere ancientst order was
Or what is now received: I witness to
The times that brought them in; so shall I do
To the freshest things now reigning and make stale
The glistering of this present, as my tale
Now seems to it. Your patience this allowing,
I turn my glass and give my scene such growing
As you had slept between: Leontes leaving,
The effects of his fond jealousies so grieving
That he shuts up himself, imagine me,
Gentle spectators, that I now may be
In fair Bohemia, and remember well,
I mentioned a son o the kings, which Florizel
I now name to you; and with speed so pace
To speak of Perdita, now grown in grace
Equal with wondering: what of her ensues
I list not prophecy; but let Times news
Be known when tis brought forth.
A shepherds daughter,
And what to her adheres, which follows after,
Is the argument of Time. Of this allow,
If ever you have spent time worse ere now;
If never, yet that Time himself doth say
He wishes earnestly you never may.
Exit
SCENE II. Bohemia. The palace of POLIXENES.
Enter POLIXENES and CAMILLO
I pray thee, good Camillo, be no more importunate:
tis a sickness denying thee any thing; a death to
grant this.
It is fifteen years since I saw my country: though
I have for the most part been aired abroad, I
desire to lay my bones there. Besides, the penitent
king, my master, hath sent for me; to whose feeling
sorrows I might be some allay, or I oerween to
think so, which is another spur to my departure.
As thou lovest me, Camillo, wipe not out the rest of
thy services by leaving me now: the need I have of
thee thine own goodness hath made; better not to
have had thee than thus to want thee: thou, having
made me businesses which none without thee can
sufficiently manage, must either stay to execute
them thyself or take away with thee the very
services thou hast done; which if I have not enough
considered, as too much I cannot, to be more
thankful to thee shall be my study, and my profit
therein the heaping friendships. Of that fatal
country, Sicilia, prithee speak no more; whose very
naming punishes me with the remembrance of that
penitent, as thou callest him, and reconciled king,
my brother; whose loss of his most precious queen
and children are even now to be afresh lamented.
Say to me, when sawest thou the Prince Florizel, my
son? Kings are no less unhappy, their issue not
being gracious, than they are in losing them when
they have approved their virtues.
Sir, it is three days since I saw the prince. What
his happier affairs may be, are to me unknown: but I
have missingly noted, he is of late much retired
from court and is less frequent to his princely
exercises than formerly he hath appeared.
I have considered so much, Camillo, and with some
care; so far that I have eyes under my service which
look upon his removedness; from whom I have this
intelligence, that he is seldom from the house of a
most homely shepherd; a man, they say, that from
very nothing, and beyond the imagination of his
neighbours, is grown into an unspeakable estate.
I have heard, sir, of such a man, who hath a
daughter of most rare note: the report of her is
extended more than can be thought to begin from such a cottage.
Thats likewise part of my intelligence; but, I
fear, the angle that plucks our son thither. Thou
shalt accompany us to the place; where we will, not
appearing what we are, have some question with the
shepherd; from whose simplicity I think it not
uneasy to get the cause of my sons resort thither.
Prithee, be my present partner in this business, and
lay aside the thoughts of Sicilia.
I willingly obey your command.
My best Camillo! We must disguise ourselves.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A road near the Shepherds cottage.
Enter AUTOLYCUS, singing
When daffodils begin to peer,
With heigh! the doxy over the dale,
Why, then comes in the sweet o the year;
For the red blood reigns in the winters pale.
The white sheet bleaching on the hedge,
With heigh! the sweet birds, O, how they sing!
Doth set my pugging tooth on edge;
For a quart of ale is a dish for a king.
The lark, that tirra-lyra chants,
With heigh! with heigh! the thrush and the jay,
Are summer songs for me and my aunts,
While we lie tumbling in the hay.
I have served Prince Florizel and in my time
wore three-pile; but now I am out of service:
But shall I go mourn for that, my dear?
The pale moon shines by night:
And when I wander here and there,
I then do most go right.
If tinkers may have leave to live,
And bear the sow-skin budget,
Then my account I well may, give,
And in the stocks avouch it.
My traffic is sheets; when the kite builds, look to
lesser linen. My father named me Autolycus; who
being, as I am, littered under Mercury, was likewise
a snapper-up of unconsidered trifles. With die and
drab I purchased this caparison, and my revenue is
the silly cheat. Gallows and knock are too powerful
on the highway: beating and hanging are terrors to
me: for the life to come, I sleep out the thought
of it. A prize! a prize!
Enter Clown
Let me see: every leven wether tods; every tod
yields pound and odd shilling; fifteen hundred
shorn. what comes the wool to?
[Aside]
If the springe hold, the cocks mine.
I cannot dot without counters. Let me see; what am
I to buy for our sheep-shearing feast? Three pound
of sugar, five pound of currants, rice,--what will
this sister of mine do with rice? But my father
hath made her mistress of the feast, and she lays it
on. She hath made me four and twenty nose-gays for
the shearers, three-man-song-men all, and very good
ones; but they are most of them means and bases; but
one puritan amongst them, and he sings psalms to
horn-pipes. I must have saffron to colour the warden
pies; mace; dates?--none, thats out of my note;
nutmegs, seven; a race or two of ginger, but that I
may beg; four pound of prunes, and as many of
raisins o the sun.
O that ever I was born!
Grovelling on the ground
I the name of me--
O, help me, help me! pluck but off these rags; and
then, death, death!
Alack, poor soul! thou hast need of more rags to lay
on thee, rather than have these off.
O sir, the loathsomeness of them offends me more
than the stripes I have received, which are mighty
ones and millions.
Alas, poor man! a million of beating may come to a
great matter.
I am robbed, sir, and beaten; my money and apparel
taen from me, and these detestable things put upon
me.
What, by a horseman, or a footman?
A footman, sweet sir, a footman.
Indeed, he should be a footman by the garments he
has left with thee: if this be a horsemans coat,
it hath seen very hot service. Lend me thy hand,
Ill help thee: come, lend me thy hand.
O, good sir, tenderly, O!
Alas, poor soul!
O, good sir, softly, good sir! I fear, sir, my
shoulder-blade is out.
How now! canst stand?
[Picking his pocket]
Softly, dear sir; good sir, softly. You ha done me
a charitable office.
Dost lack any money? I have a little money for thee.
No, good sweet sir; no, I beseech you, sir: I have
a kinsman not past three quarters of a mile hence,
unto whom I was going; I shall there have money, or
any thing I want: offer me no money, I pray you;
that kills my heart.
What manner of fellow was he that robbed you?
A fellow, sir, that I have known to go about with
troll-my-dames; I knew him once a servant of the
prince: I cannot tell, good sir, for which of his
virtues it was, but he was certainly whipped out of the court.
His vices, you would say; theres no virtue whipped
out of the court: they cherish it to make it stay
there; and yet it will no more but abide.
Vices, I would say, sir. I know this man well: he
hath been since an ape-bearer; then a
process-server, a bailiff; then he compassed a
motion of the Prodigal Son, and married a tinkers
wife within a mile where my land and living lies;
and, having flown over many knavish professions, he
settled only in rogue: some call him Autolycus.
Out upon him! prig, for my life, prig: he haunts
wakes, fairs and bear-baitings.
Very true, sir; he, sir, he; thats the rogue that
put me into this apparel.
Not a more cowardly rogue in all Bohemia: if you had
but looked big and spit at him, held have run.
I must confess to you, sir, I am no fighter: I am
false of heart that way; and that he knew, I warrant
him.
How do you now?
Sweet sir, much better than I was; I can stand and
walk: I will even take my leave of you, and pace
softly towards my kinsmans.
Shall I bring thee on the way?
No, good-faced sir; no, sweet sir.
Then fare thee well: I must go buy spices for our
sheep-shearing.
Prosper you, sweet sir!
Exit Clown
Your purse is not hot enough to purchase your spice.
Ill be with you at your sheep-shearing too: if I
make not this cheat bring out another and the
shearers prove sheep, let me be unrolled and my name
put in the book of virtue!
Sings
Jog on, jog on, the foot-path way,
And merrily hent the stile-a:
A merry heart goes all the day,
Your sad tires in a mile-a.
Exit
SCENE IV. The Shepherds cottage.
Enter FLORIZEL and PERDITA
These your unusual weeds to each part of you
Do give a life: no shepherdess, but Flora
Peering in Aprils front. This your sheep-shearing
Is as a meeting of the petty gods,
And you the queen ont.
Sir, my gracious lord,
To chide at your extremes it not becomes me:
O, pardon, that I name them! Your high self,
The gracious mark o the land, you have obscured
With a swains wearing, and me, poor lowly maid,
Most goddess-like prankd up: but that our feasts
In every mess have folly and the feeders
Digest it with a custom, I should blush
To see you so attired, sworn, I think,
To show myself a glass.
I bless the time
When my good falcon made her flight across
Thy fathers ground.
Now Jove afford you cause!
To me the difference forges dread; your greatness
Hath not been used to fear. Even now I tremble
To think your father, by some accident,
Should pass this way as you did: O, the Fates!
How would he look, to see his work so noble
Vilely bound up? What would he say? Or how
Should I, in these my borrowd flaunts, behold
The sternness of his presence?
Apprehend
Nothing but jollity. The gods themselves,
Humbling their deities to love, have taken
The shapes of beasts upon them: Jupiter
Became a bull, and bellowd; the green Neptune
A ram, and bleated; and the fire-robed god,
Golden Apollo, a poor humble swain,
As I seem now. Their transformations
Were never for a piece of beauty rarer,
Nor in a way so chaste, since my desires
Run not before mine honour, nor my lusts
Burn hotter than my faith.
O, but, sir,
Your resolution cannot hold, when tis
Opposed, as it must be, by the power of the king:
One of these two must be necessities,
Which then will speak, that you must
change this purpose,
Or I my life.
Thou dearest Perdita,
With these forced thoughts, I prithee, darken not
The mirth o the feast. Or Ill be thine, my fair,
Or not my fathers. For I cannot be
Mine own, nor any thing to any, if
I be not thine. To this I am most constant,
Though destiny say no. Be merry, gentle;
Strangle such thoughts as these with any thing
That you behold the while. Your guests are coming:
Lift up your countenance, as it were the day
Of celebration of that nuptial which
We two have sworn shall come.
O lady Fortune,
Stand you auspicious!
See, your guests approach:
Address yourself to entertain them sprightly,
And lets be red with mirth.
Enter Shepherd, Clown, MOPSA, DORCAS, and others, with POLIXENES and CAMILLO disguised
Fie, daughter! when my old wife lived, upon
This day she was both pantler, butler, cook,
Both dame and servant; welcomed all, served all;
Would sing her song and dance her turn; now here,
At upper end o the table, now i the middle;
On his shoulder, and his; her face o fire
With labour and the thing she took to quench it,
She would to each one sip. You are retired,
As if you were a feasted one and not
The hostess of the meeting: pray you, bid
These unknown friends tos welcome; for it is
A way to make us better friends, more known.
Come, quench your blushes and present yourself
That which you are, mistress o the feast: come on,
And bid us welcome to your sheep-shearing,
As your good flock shall prosper.
[To POLIXENES]                  Sir, welcome:
It is my fathers will I should take on me
The hostess-ship o the day.
To CAMILLO
Youre welcome, sir.
Give me those flowers there, Dorcas. Reverend sirs,
For you theres rosemary and rue; these keep
Seeming and savour all the winter long:
Grace and remembrance be to you both,
And welcome to our shearing!
Shepherdess,
A fair one are you--well you fit our ages
With flowers of winter.
Sir, the year growing ancient,
Not yet on summers death, nor on the birth
Of trembling winter, the fairest
flowers o the season
Are our carnations and streakd gillyvors,
Which some call natures bastards: of that kind
Our rustic gardens barren; and I care not
To get slips of them.
Wherefore, gentle maiden,
Do you neglect them?
For I have heard it said
There is an art which in their piedness shares
With great creating nature.
Say there be;
Yet nature is made better by no mean
But nature makes that mean: so, over that art
Which you say adds to nature, is an art
That nature makes. You see, sweet maid, we marry
A gentler scion to the wildest stock,
And make conceive a bark of baser kind
By bud of nobler race: this is an art
Which does mend nature, change it rather, but
The art itself is nature.
So it is.
Then make your garden rich in gillyvors,
And do not call them bastards.
Ill not put
The dibble in earth to set one slip of them;
No more than were I painted I would wish
This youth should say twere well and only therefore
Desire to breed by me. Heres flowers for you;
Hot lavender, mints, savoury, marjoram;
The marigold, that goes to bed wi the sun
And with him rises weeping: these are flowers
Of middle summer, and I think they are given
To men of middle age. Youre very welcome.
I should leave grazing, were I of your flock,
And only live by gazing.
Out, alas!
Youd be so lean, that blasts of January
Would blow you through and through.
Now, my fairst friend,
I would I had some flowers o the spring that might
Become your time of day; and yours, and yours,
That wear upon your virgin branches yet
Your maidenheads growing: O Proserpina,
For the flowers now, that frighted thou letst fall
From Diss waggon! daffodils,
That come before the swallow dares, and take
The winds of March with beauty; violets dim,
But sweeter than the lids of Junos eyes
Or Cythereas breath; pale primroses
That die unmarried, ere they can behold
Bight Phoebus in his strength--a malady
Most incident to maids; bold oxlips and
The crown imperial; lilies of all kinds,
The flower-de-luce being one! O, these I lack,
To make you garlands of, and my sweet friend,
To strew him oer and oer!
What, like a corse?
No, like a bank for love to lie and play on;
Not like a corse; or if, not to be buried,
But quick and in mine arms. Come, take your flowers:
Methinks I play as I have seen them do
In Whitsun pastorals: sure this robe of mine
Does change my disposition.
What you do
Still betters what is done. When you speak, sweet.
Ild have you do it ever: when you sing,
Ild have you buy and sell so, so give alms,
Pray so; and, for the ordering your affairs,
To sing them too: when you do dance, I wish you
A wave o the sea, that you might ever do
Nothing but that; move still, still so,
And own no other function: each your doing,
So singular in each particular,
Crowns what you are doing in the present deed,
That all your acts are queens.
O Doricles,
Your praises are too large: but that your youth,
And the true blood which peepeth fairly throught,
Do plainly give you out an unstaind shepherd,
With wisdom I might fear, my Doricles,
You wood me the false way.
I think you have
As little skill to fear as I have purpose
To put you tot. But come; our dance, I pray:
Your hand, my Perdita: so turtles pair,
That never mean to part.
Ill swear for em.
This is the prettiest low-born lass that ever
Ran on the green-sward: nothing she does or seems
But smacks of something greater than herself,
Too noble for this place.
He tells her something
That makes her blood look out: good sooth, she is
The queen of curds and cream.
Come on, strike up!
Mopsa must be your mistress: marry, garlic,
To mend her kissing with!
Now, in good time!
Not a word, a word; we stand upon our manners.
Come, strike up!
Music. Here a dance of Shepherds and Shepherdesses
Pray, good shepherd, what fair swain is this
Which dances with your daughter?
They call him Doricles; and boasts himself
To have a worthy feeding: but I have it
Upon his own report and I believe it;
He looks like sooth. He says he loves my daughter:
I think so too; for never gazed the moon
Upon the water as hell stand and read
As twere my daughters eyes: and, to be plain.
I think there is not half a kiss to choose
Who loves another best.
She dances featly.
So she does any thing; though I report it,
That should be silent: if young Doricles
Do light upon her, she shall bring him that
Which he not dreams of.
Enter Servant
O master, if you did but hear the pedlar at the
door, you would never dance again after a tabour and
pipe; no, the bagpipe could not move you: he sings
several tunes faster than youll tell money; he
utters them as he had eaten ballads and all mens
ears grew to his tunes.
He could never come better; he shall come in. I
love a ballad but even too well, if it be doleful
matter merrily set down, or a very pleasant thing
indeed and sung lamentably.
