He hath songs for man or woman, of all sizes; no
milliner can so fit his customers with gloves: he
has the prettiest love-songs for maids; so without
bawdry, which is strange; with such delicate
burthens of dildos and fadings, jump her and thump
her; and where some stretch-mouthed rascal would,
as it were, mean mischief and break a foul gap into
the matter, he makes the maid to answer Whoop, do me
no harm, good man; puts him off, slights him, with
Whoop, do me no harm, good man.
This is a brave fellow.
Believe me, thou talkest of an admirable conceited
fellow. Has he any unbraided wares?
He hath ribbons of an the colours i the rainbow;
points more than all the lawyers in Bohemia can
learnedly handle, though they come to him by the
gross: inkles, caddisses, cambrics, lawns: why, he
sings em over as they were gods or goddesses; you
would think a smock were a she-angel, he so chants
to the sleeve-hand and the work about the square ont.
Prithee bring him in; and let him approach singing.
Forewarn him that he use no scurrilous words in s tunes.
Exit Servant
You have of these pedlars, that have more in them
than yould think, sister.
Ay, good brother, or go about to think.
Enter AUTOLYCUS, singing
Lawn as white as driven snow;
Cyprus black as eer was crow;
Gloves as sweet as damask roses;
Masks for faces and for noses;
Bugle bracelet, necklace amber,
Perfume for a ladys chamber;
Golden quoifs and stomachers,
For my lads to give their dears:
Pins and poking-sticks of steel,
What maids lack from head to heel:
Come buy of me, come; come buy, come buy;
Buy lads, or else your lasses cry: Come buy.
If I were not in love with Mopsa, thou shouldst take
no money of me; but being enthralled as I am, it
will also be the bondage of certain ribbons and gloves.
I was promised them against the feast; but they come
not too late now.
He hath promised you more than that, or there be liars.
He hath paid you all he promised you; may be, he has
paid you more, which will shame you to give him again.
Is there no manners left among maids? will they
wear their plackets where they should bear their
faces? Is there not milking-time, when you are
going to bed, or kiln-hole, to whistle off these
secrets, but you must be tittle-tattling before all
our guests? tis well they are whispering: clamour
your tongues, and not a word more.
I have done. Come, you promised me a tawdry-lace
and a pair of sweet gloves.
Have I not told thee how I was cozened by the way
and lost all my money?
And indeed, sir, there are cozeners abroad;
therefore it behoves men to be wary.
Fear not thou, man, thou shalt lose nothing here.
I hope so, sir; for I have about me many parcels of charge.
What hast here? ballads?
Pray now, buy some: I love a ballad in print o
life, for then we are sure they are true.
Heres one to a very doleful tune, how a usurers
wife was brought to bed of twenty money-bags at a
burthen and how she longed to eat adders heads and
toads carbonadoed.
Is it true, think you?
Very true, and but a month old.
Bless me from marrying a usurer!
Heres the midwifes name tot, one Mistress
Tale-porter, and five or six honest wives that were
present. Why should I carry lies abroad?
Pray you now, buy it.
Come on, lay it by: and lets first see moe
ballads; well buy the other things anon.
Heres another ballad of a fish, that appeared upon
the coast on Wednesday the four-score of April,
forty thousand fathom above water, and sung this
ballad against the hard hearts of maids: it was
thought she was a woman and was turned into a cold
fish for she would not exchange flesh with one that
loved her: the ballad is very pitiful and as true.
Is it true too, think you?
Five justices hands at it, and witnesses more than
my pack will hold.
Lay it by too: another.
This is a merry ballad, but a very pretty one.
Lets have some merry ones.
Why, this is a passing merry one and goes to
the tune of Two maids wooing a man: theres
scarce a maid westward but she sings it; tis in
request, I can tell you.
We can both sing it: if thoult bear a part, thou
shalt hear; tis in three parts.
We had the tune ont a month ago.
I can bear my part; you must know tis my
occupation; have at it with you.
SONG
Get you hence, for I must go
Where it fits not you to know.
Whither?
O, whither?
Whither?
It becomes thy oath full well,
Thou to me thy secrets tell.
Me too, let me go thither.
Or thou goest to the orange or mill.
If to either, thou dost ill.
Neither.
What, neither?
Neither.
Thou hast sworn my love to be.
Thou hast sworn it more to me:
Then whither goest? say, whither?
Well have this song out anon by ourselves: my
father and the gentlemen are in sad talk, and well
not trouble them. Come, bring away thy pack after
me. Wenches, Ill buy for you both. Pedlar, lets
have the first choice. Follow me, girls.
Exit with DORCAS and MOPSA
And you shall pay well for em.
Follows singing
Will you buy any tape,
Or lace for your cape,
My dainty duck, my dear-a?
Any silk, any thread,
Any toys for your head,
Of the newst and finest, finest wear-a?
Come to the pedlar;
Moneys a medler.
That doth utter all mens ware-a.
Exit
Re-enter Servant
Master, there is three carters, three shepherds,
three neat-herds, three swine-herds, that have made
themselves all men of hair, they call themselves
Saltiers, and they have a dance which the wenches
say is a gallimaufry of gambols, because they are
not int; but they themselves are o the mind, if it
be not too rough for some that know little but
bowling, it will please plentifully.
Away! well none on t: here has been too much
homely foolery already. I know, sir, we weary you.
You weary those that refresh us: pray, lets see
these four threes of herdsmen.
One three of them, by their own report, sir, hath
danced before the king; and not the worst of the
three but jumps twelve foot and a half by the squier.
Leave your prating: since these good men are
pleased, let them come in; but quickly now.
Why, they stay at door, sir.
Exit
Here a dance of twelve Satyrs
O, father, youll know more of that hereafter.
To CAMILLO
Is it not too far gone? Tis time to part them.
Hes simple and tells much.
To FLORIZEL
How now, fair shepherd!
Your heart is full of something that does take
Your mind from feasting. Sooth, when I was young
And handed love as you do, I was wont
To load my she with knacks: I would have ransackd
The pedlars silken treasury and have pourd it
To her acceptance; you have let him go
And nothing marted with him. If your lass
Interpretation should abuse and call this
Your lack of love or bounty, you were straited
For a reply, at least if you make a care
Of happy holding her.
Old sir, I know
She prizes not such trifles as these are:
The gifts she looks from me are packd and lockd
Up in my heart; which I have given already,
But not deliverd. O, hear me breathe my life
Before this ancient sir, who, it should seem,
Hath sometime loved! I take thy hand, this hand,
As soft as doves down and as white as it,
Or Ethiopians tooth, or the fannd
snow thats bolted
By the northern blasts twice oer.
What follows this?
How prettily the young swain seems to wash
The hand was fair before! I have put you out:
But to your protestation; let me hear
What you profess.
Do, and be witness to t.
And this my neighbour too?
And he, and more
Than he, and men, the earth, the heavens, and all:
That, were I crownd the most imperial monarch,
Thereof most worthy, were I the fairest youth
That ever made eye swerve, had force and knowledge
More than was ever mans, I would not prize them
Without her love; for her employ them all;
Commend them and condemn them to her service
Or to their own perdition.
Fairly offerd.
This shows a sound affection.
But, my daughter,
Say you the like to him?
I cannot speak
So well, nothing so well; no, nor mean better:
By the pattern of mine own thoughts I cut out
The purity of his.
Take hands, a bargain!
And, friends unknown, you shall bear witness to t:
I give my daughter to him, and will make
Her portion equal his.
O, that must be
I the virtue of your daughter: one being dead,
I shall have more than you can dream of yet;
Enough then for your wonder. But, come on,
Contract us fore these witnesses.
Come, your hand;
And, daughter, yours.
Soft, swain, awhile, beseech you;
Have you a father?
I have: but what of him?
Knows he of this?
He neither does nor shall.
Methinks a father
Is at the nuptial of his son a guest
That best becomes the table. Pray you once more,
Is not your father grown incapable
Of reasonable affairs? is he not stupid
With age and altering rheums? can he speak? hear?
Know man from man? dispute his own estate?
Lies he not bed-rid? and again does nothing
But what he did being childish?
No, good sir;
He has his health and ampler strength indeed
Than most have of his age.
By my white beard,
You offer him, if this be so, a wrong
Something unfilial: reason my son
Should choose himself a wife, but as good reason
The father, all whose joy is nothing else
But fair posterity, should hold some counsel
In such a business.
I yield all this;
But for some other reasons, my grave sir,
Which tis not fit you know, I not acquaint
My father of this business.
Let him knowt.
He shall not.
Prithee, let him.
No, he must not.
Let him, my son: he shall not need to grieve
At knowing of thy choice.
Come, come, he must not.
Mark our contract.
Mark your divorce, young sir,
Discovering himself
Whom son I dare not call; thou art too base
To be acknowledged: thou a sceptres heir,
That thus affectst a sheep-hook! Thou old traitor,
I am sorry that by hanging thee I can
But shorten thy life one week. And thou, fresh piece
Of excellent witchcraft, who of force must know
The royal fool thou copest with,--
O, my heart!
Ill have thy beauty scratchd with briers, and made
More homely than thy state. For thee, fond boy,
If I may ever know thou dost but sigh
That thou no more shalt see this knack, as never
I mean thou shalt, well bar thee from succession;
Not hold thee of our blood, no, not our kin,
Far than Deucalion off: mark thou my words:
Follow us to the court. Thou churl, for this time,
Though full of our displeasure, yet we free thee
From the dead blow of it. And you, enchantment.--
Worthy enough a herdsman: yea, him too,
That makes himself, but for our honour therein,
Unworthy thee,--if ever henceforth thou
These rural latches to his entrance open,
Or hoop his body more with thy embraces,
I will devise a death as cruel for thee
As thou art tender tot.
Exit
Even here undone!
I was not much afeard; for once or twice
I was about to speak and tell him plainly,
The selfsame sun that shines upon his court
Hides not his visage from our cottage but
Looks on alike. Willt please you, sir, be gone?
I told you what would come of this: beseech you,
Of your own state take care: this dream of mine,--
Being now awake, Ill queen it no inch farther,
But milk my ewes and weep.
Why, how now, father!
Speak ere thou diest.
I cannot speak, nor think
Nor dare to know that which I know. O sir!
You have undone a man of fourscore three,
That thought to fill his grave in quiet, yea,
To die upon the bed my father died,
To lie close by his honest bones: but now
Some hangman must put on my shroud and lay me
Where no priest shovels in dust. O cursed wretch,
That knewst this was the prince,
and wouldst adventure
To mingle faith with him! Undone! undone!
If I might die within this hour, I have lived
To die when I desire.
Exit
Why look you so upon me?
I am but sorry, not afeard; delayd,
But nothing alterd: what I was, I am;
More straining on for plucking back, not following
My leash unwillingly.
Gracious my lord,
You know your fathers temper: at this time
He will allow no speech, which I do guess
You do not purpose to him; and as hardly
Will he endure your sight as yet, I fear:
Then, till the fury of his highness settle,
Come not before him.
I not purpose it.
I think, Camillo?
Even he, my lord.
How often have I told you twould be thus!
How often said, my dignity would last
But till twere known!
It cannot fail but by
The violation of my faith; and then
Let nature crush the sides o the earth together
And mar the seeds within! Lift up thy looks:
From my succession wipe me, father; I
Am heir to my affection.
Be advised.
I am, and by my fancy: if my reason
Will thereto be obedient, I have reason;
If not, my senses, better pleased with madness,
Do bid it welcome.
This is desperate, sir.
So call it: but it does fulfil my vow;
I needs must think it honesty. Camillo,
Not for Bohemia, nor the pomp that may
Be thereat gleand, for all the sun sees or
The close earth wombs or the profound sea hides
In unknown fathoms, will I break my oath
To this my fair beloved: therefore, I pray you,
As you have ever been my fathers honourd friend,
When he shall miss me,--as, in faith, I mean not
To see him any more,--cast your good counsels
Upon his passion; let myself and fortune
Tug for the time to come. This you may know
And so deliver, I am put to sea
With her whom here I cannot hold on shore;
And most opportune to our need I have
A vessel rides fast by, but not prepared
For this design. What course I mean to hold
Shall nothing benefit your knowledge, nor
Concern me the reporting.
O my lord!
I would your spirit were easier for advice,
Or stronger for your need.
Hark, Perdita
Drawing her aside
Ill hear you by and by.
Hes irremoveable,
Resolved for flight. Now were I happy, if
His going I could frame to serve my turn,
Save him from danger, do him love and honour,
Purchase the sight again of dear Sicilia
And that unhappy king, my master, whom
I so much thirst to see.
Now, good Camillo;
I am so fraught with curious business that
I leave out ceremony.
Sir, I think
You have heard of my poor services, i the love
That I have borne your father?
Very nobly
Have you deserved: it is my fathers music
To speak your deeds, not little of his care
To have them recompensed as thought on.
Well, my lord,
If you may please to think I love the king
And through him what is nearest to him, which is
Your gracious self, embrace but my direction:
If your more ponderous and settled project
May suffer alteration, on mine honour,
Ill point you where you shall have such receiving
As shall become your highness; where you may
Enjoy your mistress, from the whom, I see,
Theres no disjunction to be made, but by--
As heavens forefend!--your ruin; marry her,
And, with my best endeavours in your absence,
Your discontenting father strive to qualify
And bring him up to liking.
How, Camillo,
May this, almost a miracle, be done?
That I may call thee something more than man
And after that trust to thee.
Have you thought on
A place whereto youll go?
Not any yet:
But as the unthought-on accident is guilty
To what we wildly do, so we profess
Ourselves to be the slaves of chance and flies
Of every wind that blows.
Then list to me:
This follows, if you will not change your purpose
But undergo this flight, make for Sicilia,
And there present yourself and your fair princess,
For so I see she must be, fore Leontes:
She shall be habited as it becomes
The partner of your bed. Methinks I see
Leontes opening his free arms and weeping
His welcomes forth; asks thee the son forgiveness,
As twere i the fathers person; kisses the hands
Of your fresh princess; oer and oer divides him
Twixt his unkindness and his kindness; the one
He chides to hell and bids the other grow
Faster than thought or time.
Worthy Camillo,
What colour for my visitation shall I
Hold up before him?
Sent by the king your father
To greet him and to give him comforts. Sir,
The manner of your bearing towards him, with
What you as from your father shall deliver,
Things known betwixt us three, Ill write you down:
The which shall point you forth at every sitting
What you must say; that he shall not perceive
But that you have your fathers bosom there
And speak his very heart.
I am bound to you:
There is some sap in this.
A cause more promising
Than a wild dedication of yourselves
To unpathd waters, undreamd shores, most certain
To miseries enough; no hope to help you,
But as you shake off one to take another;
Nothing so certain as your anchors, who
Do their best office, if they can but stay you
Where youll be loath to be: besides you know
Prosperitys the very bond of love,
Whose fresh complexion and whose heart together
Affliction alters.
One of these is true:
I think affliction may subdue the cheek,
But not take in the mind.
Yea, say you so?
There shall not at your fathers house these
seven years
Be born another such.
My good Camillo,
She is as forward of her breeding as
She is i the rear our birth.
I cannot say tis pity
She lacks instructions, for she seems a mistress
To most that teach.
Your pardon, sir; for this
Ill blush you thanks.
My prettiest Perdita!
But O, the thorns we stand upon! Camillo,
Preserver of my father, now of me,
The medicine of our house, how shall we do?
We are not furnishd like Bohemias son,
Nor shall appear in Sicilia.
My lord,
Fear none of this: I think you know my fortunes
Do all lie there: it shall be so my care
To have you royally appointed as if
The scene you play were mine. For instance, sir,
That you may know you shall not want, one word.
They talk aside
Re-enter AUTOLYCUS
Ha, ha! what a fool Honesty is! and Trust, his
sworn brother, a very simple gentleman! I have sold
all my trumpery; not a counterfeit stone, not a
ribbon, glass, pomander, brooch, table-book, ballad,
knife, tape, glove, shoe-tie, bracelet, horn-ring,
to keep my pack from fasting: they throng who
should buy first, as if my trinkets had been
hallowed and brought a benediction to the buyer:
by which means I saw whose purse was best in
picture; and what I saw, to my good use I
remembered. My clown, who wants but something to
be a reasonable man, grew so in love with the
wenches song, that he would not stir his pettitoes
till he had both tune and words; which so drew the
rest of the herd to me that all their other senses
stuck in ears: you might have pinched a placket, it
was senseless; twas nothing to geld a codpiece of a
purse; I could have filed keys off that hung in
chains: no hearing, no feeling, but my sirs song,
and admiring the nothing of it. So that in this
time of lethargy I picked and cut most of their
festival purses; and had not the old man come in
with a whoo-bub against his daughter and the kings
son and scared my choughs from the chaff, I had not
left a purse alive in the whole army.
CAMILLO, FLORIZEL, and PERDITA come forward
Nay, but my letters, by this means being there
So soon as you arrive, shall clear that doubt.
And those that youll procure from King Leontes--
Shall satisfy your father.
Happy be you!
All that you speak shows fair.
Who have we here?
Seeing AUTOLYCUS
Well make an instrument of this, omit
Nothing may give us aid.
If they have overheard me now, why, hanging.
How now, good fellow! why shakest thou so? Fear
not, man; heres no harm intended to thee.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
Why, be so still; heres nobody will steal that from
thee: yet for the outside of thy poverty we must
make an exchange; therefore discase thee instantly,
--thou must think theres a necessity int,--and
change garments with this gentleman: though the
pennyworth on his side be the worst, yet hold thee,
theres some boot.
I am a poor fellow, sir.
Aside
I know ye well enough.
Nay, prithee, dispatch: the gentleman is half
flayed already.
Are you in earnest, sir?
Aside
I smell the trick ont.
Dispatch, I prithee.
Indeed, I have had earnest: but I cannot with
conscience take it.
Unbuckle, unbuckle.
FLORIZEL and AUTOLYCUS exchange garments
Fortunate mistress,--let my prophecy
Come home to ye!--you must retire yourself
Into some covert: take your sweethearts hat
And pluck it oer your brows, muffle your face,
Dismantle you, and, as you can, disliken
The truth of your own seeming; that you may--
For I do fear eyes over--to shipboard
Get undescried.
I see the play so lies
That I must bear a part.
No remedy.
Have you done there?
Should I now meet my father,
He would not call me son.
Nay, you shall have no hat.
Giving it to PERDITA
Come, lady, come. Farewell, my friend.
Adieu, sir.
O Perdita, what have we twain forgot!
Pray you, a word.
[Aside]  What I do next, shall be to tell the king
Of this escape and whither they are bound;
Wherein my hope is I shall so prevail
To force him after: in whose company
I shall review Sicilia, for whose sight
I have a womans longing.
Fortune speed us!
Thus we set on, Camillo, to the sea-side.
The swifter speed the better.
Exeunt FLORIZEL, PERDITA, and CAMILLO
I understand the business, I hear it: to have an
open ear, a quick eye, and a nimble hand, is
necessary for a cut-purse; a good nose is requisite
also, to smell out work for the other senses. I see
this is the time that the unjust man doth thrive.
What an exchange had this been without boot! What
a boot is here with this exchange! Sure the gods do
this year connive at us, and we may do any thing
extempore. The prince himself is about a piece of
iniquity, stealing away from his father with his
clog at his heels: if I thought it were a piece of
honesty to acquaint the king withal, I would not
dot: I hold it the more knavery to conceal it;
and therein am I constant to my profession.
Re-enter Clown and Shepherd
Aside, aside; here is more matter for a hot brain:
every lanes end, every shop, church, session,
hanging, yields a careful man work.
See, see; what a man you are now!
There is no other way but to tell the king
shes a changeling and none of your flesh and blood.
Nay, but hear me.
Nay, but hear me.
Go to, then.
She being none of your flesh and blood, your flesh
and blood has not offended the king; and so your
flesh and blood is not to be punished by him. Show
those things you found about her, those secret
things, all but what she has with her: this being
done, let the law go whistle: I warrant you.
I will tell the king all, every word, yea, and his
sons pranks too; who, I may say, is no honest man,
neither to his father nor to me, to go about to make
me the kings brother-in-law.
Indeed, brother-in-law was the farthest off you
could have been to him and then your blood had been
the dearer by I know how much an ounce.
[Aside]  Very wisely, puppies!
Well, let us to the king: there is that in this
fardel will make him scratch his beard.
[Aside]  I know not what impediment this complaint
may be to the flight of my master.
Pray heartily he be at palace.
[Aside]  Though I am not naturally honest, I am so
sometimes by chance: let me pocket up my pedlars excrement.
Takes off his false beard
How now, rustics! whither are you bound?
To the palace, an it like your worship.
Your affairs there, what, with whom, the condition
of that fardel, the place of your dwelling, your
names, your ages, of what having, breeding, and any
thing that is fitting to be known, discover.
We are but plain fellows, sir.
A lie; you are rough and hairy. Let me have no
lying: it becomes none but tradesmen, and they
often give us soldiers the lie: but we pay them for
it with stamped coin, not stabbing steel; therefore
they do not give us the lie.
Your worship had like to have given us one, if you
had not taken yourself with the manner.
Are you a courtier, ant like you, sir?
Whether it like me or no, I am a courtier. Seest
thou not the air of the court in these enfoldings?
hath not my gait in it the measure of the court?
receives not thy nose court-odor from me? reflect I
not on thy baseness court-contempt? Thinkest thou,
for that I insinuate, or toaze from thee thy
business, I am therefore no courtier? I am courtier
cap-a-pe; and one that will either push on or pluck
back thy business there: whereupon I command thee to
open thy affair.
My business, sir, is to the king.
What advocate hast thou to him?
I know not, ant like you.
Advocates the court-word for a pheasant: say you
have none.
None, sir; I have no pheasant, cock nor hen.
How blessed are we that are not simple men!
Yet nature might have made me as these are,
Therefore I will not disdain.
This cannot be but a great courtier.
His garments are rich, but he wears
them not handsomely.
He seems to be the more noble in being fantastical:
a great man, Ill warrant; I know by the picking
ons teeth.
The fardel there? whats i the fardel?
Wherefore that box?
Sir, there lies such secrets in this fardel and box,
which none must know but the king; and which he
shall know within this hour, if I may come to the
speech of him.
Age, thou hast lost thy labour.
Why, sir?
The king is not at the palace; he is gone aboard a
new ship to purge melancholy and air himself: for,
if thou beest capable of things serious, thou must
know the king is full of grief.
So tis said, sir; about his son, that should have
married a shepherds daughter.
If that shepherd be not in hand-fast, let him fly:
the curses he shall have, the tortures he shall
feel, will break the back of man, the heart of monster.
Think you so, sir?
Not he alone shall suffer what wit can make heavy
and vengeance bitter; but those that are germane to
him, though removed fifty times, shall all come
under the hangman: which though it be great pity,
yet it is necessary. An old sheep-whistling rogue a
ram-tender, to offer to have his daughter come into
grace! Some say he shall be stoned; but that death
is too soft for him, say Idraw our throne into a
sheep-cote! all deaths are too few, the sharpest too easy.
Has the old man eer a son, sir, do you hear. ant
like you, sir?
He has a son, who shall be flayed alive; then
nointed over with honey, set on the head of a
wasps nest; then stand till he be three quarters
and a dram dead; then recovered again with
aqua-vitae or some other hot infusion; then, raw as
he is, and in the hottest day prognostication
proclaims, shall be be set against a brick-wall, the
sun looking with a southward eye upon him, where he
is to behold him with flies blown to death. But what
talk we of these traitorly rascals, whose miseries
are to be smiled at, their offences being so
capital? Tell me, for you seem to be honest plain
men, what you have to the king: being something
gently considered, Ill bring you where he is
aboard, tender your persons to his presence,
whisper him in your behalfs; and if it be in man
besides the king to effect your suits, here is man
shall do it.
He seems to be of great authority: close with him,
give him gold; and though authority be a stubborn
bear, yet he is oft led by the nose with gold: show
the inside of your purse to the outside of his hand,
and no more ado. Remember stoned, and flayed alive.
Ant please you, sir, to undertake the business for
us, here is that gold I have: Ill make it as much
more and leave this young man in pawn till I bring it you.
After I have done what I promised?
Ay, sir.
Well, give me the moiety. Are you a party in this business?
In some sort, sir: but though my case be a pitiful
one, I hope I shall not be flayed out of it.
O, thats the case of the shepherds son: hang him,
hell be made an example.
Comfort, good comfort! We must to the king and show
our strange sights: he must know tis none of your
daughter nor my sister; we are gone else. Sir, I
will give you as much as this old man does when the
business is performed, and remain, as he says, your
pawn till it be brought you.
I will trust you. Walk before toward the sea-side;
go on the right hand: I will but look upon the
hedge and follow you.
We are blest in this man, as I may say, even blest.
Lets before as he bids us: he was provided to do us good.
Exeunt Shepherd and Clown
If I had a mind to be honest, I see Fortune would
not suffer me: she drops booties in my mouth. I am
courted now with a double occasion, gold and a means
to do the prince my master good; which who knows how
that may turn back to my advancement? I will bring
these two moles, these blind ones, aboard him: if he
think it fit to shore them again and that the
complaint they have to the king concerns him
nothing, let him call me rogue for being so far
officious; for I am proof against that title and
what shame else belongs tot. To him will I present
them: there may be matter in it.
Exit
ACT V
SCENE I. A room in LEONTES palace.
Enter LEONTES, CLEOMENES, DION, PAULINA, and Servants
Sir, you have done enough, and have performd
A saint-like sorrow: no fault could you make,
Which you have not redeemd; indeed, paid down
More penitence than done trespass: at the last,
Do as the heavens have done, forget your evil;
With them forgive yourself.
Whilst I remember
Her and her virtues, I cannot forget
My blemishes in them, and so still think of
The wrong I did myself; which was so much,
That heirless it hath made my kingdom and
Destroyd the sweetst companion that eer man
Bred his hopes out of.
True, too true, my lord:
If, one by one, you wedded all the world,
Or from the all that are took something good,
To make a perfect woman, she you killd
Would be unparalleld.
I think so. Killd!
She I killd! I did so: but thou strikest me
Sorely, to say I did; it is as bitter
Upon thy tongue as in my thought: now, good now,
Say so but seldom.
Not at all, good lady:
You might have spoken a thousand things that would
Have done the time more benefit and graced
Your kindness better.
You are one of those
Would have him wed again.
If you would not so,
You pity not the state, nor the remembrance
Of his most sovereign name; consider little
What dangers, by his highness fail of issue,
May drop upon his kingdom and devour
Incertain lookers on. What were more holy
Than to rejoice the former queen is well?
What holier than, for royaltys repair,
For present comfort and for future good,
To bless the bed of majesty again
With a sweet fellow tot?
There is none worthy,
Respecting her thats gone. Besides, the gods
Will have fulfilld their secret purposes;
For has not the divine Apollo said,
Ist not the tenor of his oracle,
That King Leontes shall not have an heir
Till his lost child be found? which that it shall,
Is all as monstrous to our human reason
As my Antigonus to break his grave
And come again to me; who, on my life,
Did perish with the infant. Tis your counsel
My lord should to the heavens be contrary,
Oppose against their wills.
To LEONTES
Care not for issue;
The crown will find an heir: great Alexander
Left his to the worthiest; so his successor
Was like to be the best.
Good Paulina,
Who hast the memory of Hermione,
I know, in honour, O, that ever I
Had squared me to thy counsel! then, even now,
I might have lookd upon my queens full eyes,
Have taken treasure from her lips--
And left them
More rich for what they yielded.
Thou speakst truth.
No more such wives; therefore, no wife: one worse,
And better used, would make her sainted spirit
Again possess her corpse, and on this stage,
Where were offenders now, appear soul-vexd,
And begin, Why to me?
Had she such power,
She had just cause.
She had; and would incense me
To murder her I married.
I should so.
Were I the ghost that walkd, Ild bid you mark
Her eye, and tell me for what dull part int
You chose her; then Ild shriek, that even your ears
Should rift to hear me; and the words that followd
Should be Remember mine.
Stars, stars,
And all eyes else dead coals! Fear thou no wife;
Ill have no wife, Paulina.
Will you swear
Never to marry but by my free leave?
Never, Paulina; so be blest my spirit!
Then, good my lords, bear witness to his oath.
You tempt him over-much.
Unless another,
As like Hermione as is her picture,
Affront his eye.
Good madam,--
I have done.
Yet, if my lord will marry,--if you will, sir,
No remedy, but you will,--give me the office
To choose you a queen: she shall not be so young
As was your former; but she shall be such
As, walkd your first queens ghost,
it should take joy
To see her in your arms.
My true Paulina,
We shall not marry till thou bidst us.
That
Shall be when your first queens again in breath;
Never till then.
Enter a Gentleman
One that gives out himself Prince Florizel,
Son of Polixenes, with his princess, she
The fairest I have yet beheld, desires access
To your high presence.
What with him? he comes not
Like to his fathers greatness: his approach,
So out of circumstance and sudden, tells us
Tis not a visitation framed, but forced
By need and accident. What train?
But few,
And those but mean.
His princess, say you, with him?
Ay, the most peerless piece of earth, I think,
That eer the sun shone bright on.
O Hermione,
As every present time doth boast itself
Above a better gone, so must thy grave
Give way to whats seen now! Sir, you yourself
Have said and writ so, but your writing now
Is colder than that theme, She had not been,
Nor was not to be equalld;--thus your verse
Flowd with her beauty once: tis shrewdly ebbd,
To say you have seen a better.
Pardon, madam:
The one I have almost forgot,--your pardon,--
The other, when she has obtaind your eye,
Will have your tongue too. This is a creature,
Would she begin a sect, might quench the zeal
Of all professors else, make proselytes
Of who she but bid follow.
How! not women?
Women will love her, that she is a woman
More worth than any man; men, that she is
The rarest of all women.
Go, Cleomenes;
Yourself, assisted with your honourd friends,
Bring them to our embracement. Still, tis strange
Exeunt CLEOMENES and others
He thus should steal upon us.
Had our prince,
Jewel of children, seen this hour, he had paird
Well with this lord: there was not full a month
Between their births.
Prithee, no more; cease; thou knowst
He dies to me again when talkd of: sure,
When I shall see this gentleman, thy speeches
Will bring me to consider that which may
Unfurnish me of reason. They are come.
Re-enter CLEOMENES and others, with FLORIZEL and PERDITA
Your mother was most true to wedlock, prince;
For she did print your royal father off,
Conceiving you: were I but twenty-one,
Your fathers image is so hit in you,
His very air, that I should call you brother,
As I did him, and speak of something wildly
By us performd before. Most dearly welcome!
And your fair princess,--goddess!--O, alas!
I lost a couple, that twixt heaven and earth
Might thus have stood begetting wonder as
You, gracious couple, do: and then I lost--
All mine own folly--the society,
Amity too, of your brave father, whom,
Though bearing misery, I desire my life
Once more to look on him.
By his command
Have I here touchd Sicilia and from him
Give you all greetings that a king, at friend,
Can send his brother: and, but infirmity
Which waits upon worn times hath something seized
His wishd ability, he had himself
The lands and waters twixt your throne and his
Measured to look upon you; whom he loves--
He bade me say so--more than all the sceptres
And those that bear them living.
O my brother,
Good gentleman! the wrongs I have done thee stir
Afresh within me, and these thy offices,
So rarely kind, are as interpreters
Of my behind-hand slackness. Welcome hither,
As is the spring to the earth. And hath he too
Exposed this paragon to the fearful usage,
At least ungentle, of the dreadful Neptune,
To greet a man not worth her pains, much less
The adventure of her person?
Good my lord,
She came from Libya.
Where the warlike Smalus,
That noble honourd lord, is feard and loved?
Most royal sir, from thence; from him, whose daughter
His tears proclaimd his, parting with her: thence,
A prosperous south-wind friendly, we have crossd,
To execute the charge my father gave me
For visiting your highness: my best train
I have from your Sicilian shores dismissd;
Who for Bohemia bend, to signify
Not only my success in Libya, sir,
But my arrival and my wifes in safety
Here where we are.
The blessed gods
Purge all infection from our air whilst you
Do climate here! You have a holy father,
A graceful gentleman; against whose person,
So sacred as it is, I have done sin:
For which the heavens, taking angry note,
Have left me issueless; and your fathers blest,
As he from heaven merits it, with you
Worthy his goodness. What might I have been,
Might I a son and daughter now have lookd on,
Such goodly things as you!
Enter a Lord
Most noble sir,
That which I shall report will bear no credit,
Were not the proof so nigh. Please you, great sir,
Bohemia greets you from himself by me;
Desires you to attach his son, who has--
His dignity and duty both cast off--
Fled from his father, from his hopes, and with
A shepherds daughter.
Wheres Bohemia? speak.
Here in your city; I now came from him:
I speak amazedly; and it becomes
My marvel and my message. To your court
Whiles he was hastening, in the chase, it seems,
Of this fair couple, meets he on the way
The father of this seeming lady and
Her brother, having both their country quitted
With this young prince.
Camillo has betrayd me;
Whose honour and whose honesty till now
Endured all weathers.
Layt so to his charge:
Hes with the king your father.
Who? Camillo?
Camillo, sir; I spake with him; who now
Has these poor men in question. Never saw I
Wretches so quake: they kneel, they kiss the earth;
Forswear themselves as often as they speak:
Bohemia stops his ears, and threatens them
With divers deaths in death.
O my poor father!
The heaven sets spies upon us, will not have
Our contract celebrated.
You are married?
We are not, sir, nor are we like to be;
The stars, I see, will kiss the valleys first:
The odds for high and lows alike.
My lord,
Is this the daughter of a king?
She is,
When once she is my wife.
That once I see by your good fathers speed
Will come on very slowly. I am sorry,
