So many of his shadows thou hast met
And not the very king. I have two boys
Seek Percy and thyself about the field:
But, seeing thou fallst on me so luckily,
I will assay thee: so, defend thyself.
I fear thou art another counterfeit;
And yet, in faith, thou bearst thee like a king:
But mine I am sure thou art, whoeer thou be,
And thus I win thee.
They fight. KING HENRY being in danger, PRINCE HENRY enters
Hold up thy head, vile Scot, or thou art like
Never to hold it up again! the spirits
Of valiant Shirley, Stafford, Blunt, are in my arms:
It is the Prince of Wales that threatens thee;
Who never promiseth but he means to pay.
They fight: DOUGLAS flies
Cheerly, my lordhow fares your grace?
Sir Nicholas Gawsey hath for succor sent,
And so hath Clifton: Ill to Clifton straight.
Stay, and breathe awhile:
Thou hast redeemd thy lost opinion,
And showd thou makest some tender of my life,
In this fair rescue thou hast brought to me.
O God! they did me too much injury
That ever said I hearkend for your death.
If it were so, I might have let alone
The insulting hand of Douglas over you,
Which would have been as speedy in your end
As all the poisonous potions in the world
And saved the treacherous labour of your son.
Make up to Clifton: Ill to Sir Nicholas Gawsey.
Exit
Enter HOTSPUR
If I mistake not, thou art Harry Monmouth.
Thou speakst as if I would deny my name.
My name is Harry Percy.
Why, then I see
A very valiant rebel of the name.
I am the Prince of Wales; and think not, Percy,
To share with me in glory any more:
Two stars keep not their motion in one sphere;
Nor can one England brook a double reign,
Of Harry Percy and the Prince of Wales.
Nor shall it, Harry; for the hour is come
To end the one of us; and would to God
Thy name in arms were now as great as mine!
Ill make it greater ere I part from thee;
And all the budding honours on thy crest
Ill crop, to make a garland for my head.
I can no longer brook thy vanities.
They fight
Enter FALSTAFF
Well said, Hal! to it Hal! Nay, you shall find no
boys play here, I can tell you.
Re-enter DOUGLAS; he fights with FALSTAFF,  who falls down as if he were dead, and exit DOUGLAS. HOTSPUR is wounded, and falls
O, Harry, thou hast robbd me of my youth!
I better brook the loss of brittle life
Than those proud titles thou hast won of me;
They wound my thoughts worse than sword my flesh:
But thoughts the slave of life, and life times fool;
And time, that takes survey of all the world,
Must have a stop. O, I could prophesy,
But that the earthy and cold hand of death
Lies on my tongue: no, Percy, thou art dust
And food for--
Dies
For worms, brave Percy: fare thee well, great heart!
Ill-weaved ambition, how much art thou shrunk!
When that this body did contain a spirit,
A kingdom for it was too small a bound;
But now two paces of the vilest earth
Is room enough: this earth that bears thee dead
Bears not alive so stout a gentleman.
If thou wert sensible of courtesy,
I should not make so dear a show of zeal:
But let my favours hide thy mangled face;
And, even in thy behalf, Ill thank myself
For doing these fair rites of tenderness.
Adieu, and take thy praise with thee to heaven!
Thy ignominy sleep with thee in the grave,
But not rememberd in thy epitaph!
He spieth FALSTAFF on the ground
What, old acquaintance! could not all this flesh
Keep in a little life? Poor Jack, farewell!
I could have better spared a better man:
O, I should have a heavy miss of thee,
If I were much in love with vanity!
Death hath not struck so fat a deer to-day,
Though many dearer, in this bloody fray.
Embowelld will I see thee by and by:
Till then in blood by noble Percy lie.
Exit PRINCE HENRY
[Rising up]  Embowelled! if thou embowel me to-day,
Ill give you leave to powder me and eat me too
to-morrow. Sblood,twas time to counterfeit, or
that hot termagant Scot had paid me scot and lot too.
Counterfeit? I lie, I am no counterfeit: to die,
is to be a counterfeit; for he is but the
counterfeit of a man who hath not the life of a man:
but to counterfeit dying, when a man thereby
liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and
perfect image of life indeed. The better part of
valour is discretion; in the which better part I
have saved my life.Zounds, I am afraid of this
gunpowder Percy, though he be dead: how, if he
should counterfeit too and rise? by my faith, I am
afraid he would prove the better counterfeit.
Therefore Ill make him sure; yea, and Ill swear I
killed him. Why may not he rise as well as I?
Nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me.
Therefore, sirrah,
Stabbing him
with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.
Takes up HOTSPUR on his back
Re-enter PRINCE HENRY and LORD JOHN OF LANCASTER
Come, brother John; full bravely hast thou fleshd
Thy maiden sword.
But, soft! whom have we here?
Did you not tell me this fat man was dead?
I did; I saw him dead,
Breathless and bleeding on the ground. Art
thou alive?
Or is it fantasy that plays upon our eyesight?
I prithee, speak; we will not trust our eyes
Without our ears: thou art not what thou seemst.
No, thats certain; I am not a double man: but if I
be not Jack Falstaff, then am I a Jack. There is Percy:
Throwing the body down
if your father will do me any honour, so; if not, let
him kill the next Percy himself. I look to be either
earl or duke, I can assure you.
Why, Percy I killed myself and saw thee dead.
Didst thou? Lord, Lord, how this world is given to
lying! I grant you I was down and out of breath;
and so was he: but we rose both at an instant and
fought a long hour by Shrewsbury clock. If I may be
believed, so; if not, let them that should reward
valour bear the sin upon their own heads. Ill take
it upon my death, I gave him this wound in the
thigh: if the man were alive and would deny it,
zounds, I would make him eat a piece of my sword.
This is the strangest tale that ever I heard.
This is the strangest fellow, brother John.
Come, bring your luggage nobly on your back:
For my part, if a lie may do thee grace,
Ill gild it with the happiest terms I have.
A retreat is sounded
The trumpet sounds retreat; the day is ours.
Come, brother, let us to the highest of the field,
To see what friends are living, who are dead.
Exeunt PRINCE HENRY and LANCASTER
Ill follow, as they say, for reward. He that
rewards me, God reward him! If I do grow great,
Ill grow less; for Ill purge, and leave sack, and
live cleanly as a nobleman should do.
Exit
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
The trumpets sound. Enter KING HENRY IV, PRINCE  HENRY, LORD JOHN LANCASTER, EARL OF WESTMORELAND, with WORCESTER and VERNON prisoners
Thus ever did rebellion find rebuke.
Ill-spirited Worcester! did not we send grace,
Pardon and terms of love to all of you?
And wouldst thou turn our offers contrary?
Misuse the tenor of thy kinsmans trust?
Three knights upon our party slain to-day,
A noble earl and many a creature else
Had been alive this hour,
If like a Christian thou hadst truly borne
Betwixt our armies true intelligence.
What I have done my safety urged me to;
And I embrace this fortune patiently,
Since not to be avoided it falls on me.
Bear Worcester to the death and Vernon too:
Other offenders we will pause upon.
Exeunt WORCESTER and VERNON, guarded
How goes the field?
The noble Scot, Lord Douglas, when he saw
The fortune of the day quite turnd from him,
The noble Percy slain, and all his men
Upon the foot of fear, fled with the rest;
And falling from a hill, he was so bruised
That the pursuers took him. At my tent
The Douglas is; and I beseech your grace
I may dispose of him.
With all my heart.
Then, brother John of Lancaster, to you
This honourable bounty shall belong:
Go to the Douglas, and deliver him
Up to his pleasure, ransomless and free:
His valour shown upon our crests to-day
Hath taught us how to cherish such high deeds
Even in the bosom of our adversaries.
I thank your grace for this high courtesy,
Which I shall give away immediately.
Then this remains, that we divide our power.
You, son John, and my cousin Westmoreland
Towards York shall bend you with your dearest speed,
To meet Northumberland and the prelate Scroop,
Who, as we hear, are busily in arms:
Myself and you, son Harry, will towards Wales,
To fight with Glendower and the Earl of March.
Rebellion in this land shall lose his sway,
Meeting the cheque of such another day:
And since this business so fair is done,
Let us not leave till all our own be won.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Westminster Abbey.
Dead March. Enter the Funeral of KING HENRY the  Fifth, attended on by Dukes of BEDFORD, Regent of  France; GLOUCESTER, Protector; and EXETER, Earl of WARWICK, the BISHOP OF WINCHESTER, Heralds,  and c
Hung be the heavens with black, yield day to night!
Comets, importing change of times and states,
Brandish your crystal tresses in the sky,
And with them scourge the bad revolting stars
That have consented unto Henrys death!
King Henry the Fifth, too famous to live long!
England neer lost a king of so much worth.
England neer had a king until his time.
Virtue he had, deserving to command:
His brandishd sword did blind men with his beams:
His arms spread wider than a dragons wings;
His sparking eyes, replete with wrathful fire,
More dazzled and drove back his enemies
Than mid-day sun fierce bent against their faces.
What should I say? his deeds exceed all speech:
He neer lift up his hand but conquered.
We mourn in black: why mourn we not in blood?
Henry is dead and never shall revive:
Upon a wooden coffin we attend,
And deaths dishonourable victory
We with our stately presence glorify,
Like captives bound to a triumphant car.
What! shall we curse the planets of mishap
That plotted thus our glorys overthrow?
Or shall we think the subtle-witted French
Conjurers and sorcerers, that afraid of him
By magic verses have contrived his end?
BISHOP
He was a king blessd of the King of kings.
Unto the French the dreadful judgement-day
So dreadful will not be as was his sight.
The battles of the Lord of hosts he fought:
The churchs prayers made him so prosperous.
The church! where is it? Had not churchmen prayd,
His thread of life had not so soon decayd:
None do you like but an effeminate prince,
Whom, like a school-boy, you may over-awe.
BISHOP
Gloucester, whateer we like, thou art protector
And lookest to command the prince and realm.
Thy wife is proud; she holdeth thee in awe,
More than God or religious churchmen may.
Name not religion, for thou lovest the flesh,
And neer throughout the year to church thou gost
Except it be to pray against thy foes.
Cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace:
Lets to the altar: heralds, wait on us:
Instead of gold, well offer up our arms:
Since arms avail not now that Henrys dead.
Posterity, await for wretched years,
When at their mothers moist eyes babes shall suck,
Our isle be made a nourish of salt tears,
And none but women left to wail the dead.
Henry the Fifth, thy ghost I invocate:
Prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils,
Combat with adverse planets in the heavens!
A far more glorious star thy soul will make
Than Julius Caesar or bright--
Enter a Messenger
My honourable lords, health to you all!
Sad tidings bring I to you out of France,
Of loss, of slaughter and discomfiture:
Guienne, Champagne, Rheims, Orleans,
Paris, Guysors, Poictiers, are all quite lost.
What sayst thou, man, before dead Henrys corse?
Speak softly, or the loss of those great towns
Will make him burst his lead and rise from death.
Is Paris lost? is Rouen yielded up?
If Henry were recalld to life again,
These news would cause him once more yield the ghost.
How were they lost? what treachery was used?
No treachery; but want of men and money.
Amongst the soldiers this is muttered,
That here you maintain several factions,
And whilst a field should be dispatchd and fought,
You are disputing of your generals:
One would have lingering wars with little cost;
Another would fly swift, but wanteth wings;
A third thinks, without expense at all,
By guileful fair words peace may be obtaind.
Awake, awake, English nobility!
Let not sloth dim your horrors new-begot:
Croppd are the flower-de-luces in your arms;
Of Englands coat one half is cut away.
Were our tears wanting to this funeral,
These tidings would call forth their flowing tides.
Me they concern; Regent I am of France.
Give me my steeled coat. Ill fight for France.
Away with these disgraceful wailing robes!
Wounds will I lend the French instead of eyes,
To weep their intermissive miseries.
Enter to them another Messenger
Lords, view these letters full of bad mischance.
France is revolted from the English quite,
Except some petty towns of no import:
The Dauphin Charles is crowned king of Rheims;
The Bastard of Orleans with him is joind;
Reignier, Duke of Anjou, doth take his part;
The Duke of Alencon flieth to his side.
The Dauphin crowned king! all fly to him!
O, whither shall we fly from this reproach?
We will not fly, but to our enemies throats.
Bedford, if thou be slack, Ill fight it out.
Gloucester, why doubtst thou of my forwardness?
An army have I musterd in my thoughts,
Wherewith already France is overrun.
Enter another Messenger
My gracious lords, to add to your laments,
Wherewith you now bedew King Henrys hearse,
I must inform you of a dismal fight
Betwixt the stout Lord Talbot and the French.
BISHOP
What! wherein Talbot overcame? ist so?
O, no; wherein Lord Talbot was oerthrown:
The circumstance Ill tell you more at large.
The tenth of August last this dreadful lord,
Retiring from the siege of Orleans,
Having full scarce six thousand in his troop.
By three and twenty thousand of the French
Was round encompassed and set upon.
No leisure had he to enrank his men;
He wanted pikes to set before his archers;
Instead whereof sharp stakes pluckd out of hedges
They pitched in the ground confusedly,
To keep the horsemen off from breaking in.
More than three hours the fight continued;
Where valiant Talbot above human thought
Enacted wonders with his sword and lance:
Hundreds he sent to hell, and none durst stand him;
Here, there, and every where, enraged he flew:
The French exclaimd, the devil was in arms;
All the whole army stood agazed on him:
His soldiers spying his undaunted spirit
A Talbot! a Talbot! cried out amain
And rushd into the bowels of the battle.
Here had the conquest fully been seald up,
If Sir John Fastolfe had not playd the coward:
He, being in the vaward, placed behind
With purpose to relieve and follow them,
Cowardly fled, not having struck one stroke.
Hence grew the general wreck and massacre;
Enclosed were they with their enemies:
A base Walloon, to win the Dauphins grace,
Thrust Talbot with a spear into the back,
Whom all France with their chief assembled strength
Durst not presume to look once in the face.
Is Talbot slain? then I will slay myself,
For living idly here in pomp and ease,
Whilst such a worthy leader, wanting aid,
Unto his dastard foemen is betrayd.
O no, he lives; but is took prisoner,
And Lord Scales with him and Lord Hungerford:
Most of the rest slaughterd or took likewise.
His ransom there is none but I shall pay:
Ill hale the Dauphin headlong from his throne:
His crown shall be the ransom of my friend;
Four of their lords Ill change for one of ours.
Farewell, my masters; to my task will I;
Bonfires in France forthwith I am to make,
To keep our great Saint Georges feast withal:
Ten thousand soldiers with me I will take,
Whose bloody deeds shall make all Europe quake.
So you had need; for Orleans is besieged;
The English army is grown weak and faint:
The Earl of Salisbury craveth supply,
And hardly keeps his men from mutiny,
Since they, so few, watch such a multitude.
Remember, lords, your oaths to Henry sworn,
Either to quell the Dauphin utterly,
Or bring him in obedience to your yoke.
I do remember it; and here take my leave,
To go about my preparation.
Exit
Ill to the Tower with all the haste I can,
To view the artillery and munition;
And then I will proclaim young Henry king.
Exit
To Eltham will I, where the young king is,
Being ordaind his special governor,
And for his safety there Ill best devise.
Exit
BISHOP
Each hath his place and function to attend:
I am left out; for me nothing remains.
But long I will not be Jack out of office:
The king from Eltham I intend to steal
And sit at chiefest stern of public weal.
Exeunt
SCENE II. France. Before Orleans.
Sound a flourish. Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, marching with drum and Soldiers
Mars his true moving, even as in the heavens
So in the earth, to this day is not known:
Late did he shine upon the English side;
Now we are victors; upon us he smiles.
What towns of any moment but we have?
At pleasure here we lie near Orleans;
Otherwhiles the famishd English, like pale ghosts,
Faintly besiege us one hour in a month.
They want their porridge and their fat bull-beeves:
Either they must be dieted like mules
And have their provender tied to their mouths
Or piteous they will look, like drowned mice.
Lets raise the siege: why live we idly here?
Talbot is taken, whom we wont to fear:
Remaineth none but mad-braind Salisbury;
And he may well in fretting spend his gall,
Nor men nor money hath he to make war.
Sound, sound alarum! we will rush on them.
Now for the honour of the forlorn French!
Him I forgive my death that killeth me
When he sees me go back one foot or fly.
Exeunt
Here alarum; they are beaten back by the English with great loss. Re-enter CHARLES, ALENCON, and REIGNIER
Who ever saw the like? what men have I!
Dogs! cowards! dastards! I would neer have fled,
But that they left me midst my enemies.
Salisbury is a desperate homicide;
He fighteth as one weary of his life.
The other lords, like lions wanting food,
Do rush upon us as their hungry prey.
Froissart, a countryman of ours, records,
England all Olivers and Rowlands bred,
During the time Edward the Third did reign.
More truly now may this be verified;
For none but Samsons and Goliases
It sendeth forth to skirmish. One to ten!
Lean, raw-boned rascals! who would eer suppose
They had such courage and audacity?
Lets leave this town; for they are hare-braind slaves,
And hunger will enforce them to be more eager:
Of old I know them; rather with their teeth
The walls theyll tear down than forsake the siege.
I think, by some odd gimmors or device
Their arms are set like clocks, stiff to strike on;
Else neer could they hold out so as they do.
By my consent, well even let them alone.
Be it so.
Enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS
Wheres the Prince Dauphin? I have news for him.
Bastard of Orleans, thrice welcome to us.
Methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appalld:
Hath the late overthrow wrought this offence?
Be not dismayd, for succor is at hand:
A holy maid hither with me I bring,
Which by a vision sent to her from heaven
Ordained is to raise this tedious siege
And drive the English forth the bounds of France.
The spirit of deep prophecy she hath,
Exceeding the nine sibyls of old Rome:
Whats past and whats to come she can descry.
Speak, shall I call her in? Believe my words,
For they are certain and unfallible.
Go, call her in.
Exit BASTARD OF ORLEANS
But first, to try her skill,
Reignier, stand thou as Dauphin in my place:
Question her proudly; let thy looks be stern:
By this means shall we sound what skill she hath.
Re-enter the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, with JOAN LA PUCELLE
Fair maid, ist thou wilt do these wondrous feats?
Reignier, ist thou that thinkest to beguile me?
Where is the Dauphin? Come, come from behind;
I know thee well, though never seen before.
Be not amazed, theres nothing hid from me:
In private will I talk with thee apart.
Stand back, you lords, and give us leave awhile.
She takes upon her bravely at first dash.
Dauphin, I am by birth a shepherds daughter,
My wit untraind in any kind of art.
Heaven and our Lady gracious hath it pleased
To shine on my contemptible estate:
Lo, whilst I waited on my tender lambs,
And to suns parching heat displayd my cheeks,
Gods mother deigned to appear to me
And in a vision full of majesty
Willd me to leave my base vocation
And free my country from calamity:
Her aid she promised and assured success:
In complete glory she reveald herself;
And, whereas I was black and swart before,
With those clear rays which she infused on me
That beauty am I blessd with which you see.
Ask me what question thou canst possible,
And I will answer unpremeditated:
My courage try by combat, if thou darest,
And thou shalt find that I exceed my sex.
Resolve on this, thou shalt be fortunate,
If thou receive me for thy warlike mate.
Thou hast astonishd me with thy high terms:
Only this proof Ill of thy valour make,
In single combat thou shalt buckle with me,
And if thou vanquishest, thy words are true;
Otherwise I renounce all confidence.
I am prepared: here is my keen-edged sword,
Deckd with five flower-de-luces on each side;
The which at Touraine, in Saint Katharines
churchyard,
Out of a great deal of old iron I chose forth.
Then come, o Gods name; I fear no woman.
And while I live, Ill neer fly from a man.
Here they fight, and JOAN LA PUCELLE overcomes
Stay, stay thy hands! thou art an Amazon
And fightest with the sword of Deborah.
Christs mother helps me, else I were too weak.
Whoeer helps thee, tis thou that must help me:
Impatiently I burn with thy desire;
My heart and hands thou hast at once subdued.
Excellent Pucelle, if thy name be so,
Let me thy servant and not sovereign be:
Tis the French Dauphin sueth to thee thus.
I must not yield to any rites of love,
For my professions sacred from above:
When I have chased all thy foes from hence,
Then will I think upon a recompense.
Meantime look gracious on thy prostrate thrall.
My lord, methinks, is very long in talk.
Doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock;
Else neer could he so long protract his speech.
Shall we disturb him, since he keeps no mean?
He may mean more than we poor men do know:
These women are shrewd tempters with their tongues.
My lord, where are you? what devise you on?
Shall we give over Orleans, or no?
Why, no, I say, distrustful recreants!
Fight till the last gasp; I will be your guard.
What she says Ill confirm: well fight it out.
Assignd am I to be the English scourge.
This night the siege assuredly Ill raise:
Expect Saint Martins summer, halcyon days,
Since I have entered into these wars.
Glory is like a circle in the water,
Which never ceaseth to enlarge itself
Till by broad spreading it disperse to nought.
With Henrys death the English circle ends;
Dispersed are the glories it included.
Now am I like that proud insulting ship
Which Caesar and his fortune bare at once.
Was Mahomet inspired with a dove?
Thou with an eagle art inspired then.
Helen, the mother of great Constantine,
Nor yet Saint Philips daughters, were like thee.
Bright star of Venus, falln down on the earth,
How may I reverently worship thee enough?
Leave off delays, and let us raise the siege.
Woman, do what thou canst to save our honours;
Drive them from Orleans and be immortalized.
Presently well try: come, lets away about it:
No prophet will I trust, if she prove false.
Exeunt
SCENE III. London. Before the Tower.
Enter GLOUCESTER, with his Serving-men in blue coats
I am come to survey the Tower this day:
Since Henrys death, I fear, there is conveyance.
Where be these warders, that they wait not here?
Open the gates; tis Gloucester that calls.
[Within]  Whos there that knocks so imperiously?
First Serving-ManIt is the noble Duke of Gloucester.
[Within]  Whoeer he be, you may not be let in.
First Serving-ManVillains, answer you so the lord protector?
[Within]  The Lord protect him! so we answer him:
We do no otherwise than we are willd.
Who willed you? or whose will stands but mine?
Theres none protector of the realm but I.
Break up the gates, Ill be your warrantize.
Shall I be flouted thus by dunghill grooms?
Gloucesters men rush at the Tower Gates, and WOODVILE the Lieutenant speaks within
What noise is this? what traitors have we here?
Lieutenant, is it you whose voice I hear?
Open the gates; heres Gloucester that would enter.
Have patience, noble duke; I may not open;
The Cardinal of Winchester forbids:
From him I have express commandment
That thou nor none of thine shall be let in.
Faint-hearted Woodvile, prizest him fore me?
Arrogant Winchester, that haughty prelate,
Whom Henry, our late sovereign, neer could brook?
Thou art no friend to God or to the king:
Open the gates, or Ill shut thee out shortly.
Serving-MenOpen the gates unto the lord protector,
Or well burst them open, if that you come not quickly.
Enter to the Protector at the Tower Gates BISHOP OF WINCHESTER and his men in tawny coats
BISHOP
How now, ambitious Humphry! what means this?
Peeld priest, dost thou command me to be shut out?
BISHOP
I do, thou most usurping proditor,
And not protector, of the king or realm.
Stand back, thou manifest conspirator,
Thou that contrivedst to murder our dead lord;
Thou that givest whores indulgences to sin:
Ill canvass thee in thy broad cardinals hat,
If thou proceed in this thy insolence.
BISHOP
Nay, stand thou back, I will not budge a foot:
This be Damascus, be thou cursed Cain,
To slay thy brother Abel, if thou wilt.
I will not slay thee, but Ill drive thee back:
Thy scarlet robes as a childs bearing-cloth
Ill use to carry thee out of this place.
BISHOP
Do what thou darest; I beard thee to thy face.
What! am I dared and bearded to my face?
Draw, men, for all this privileged place;
Blue coats to tawny coats. Priest, beware your beard,
I mean to tug it and to cuff you soundly:
Under my feet I stamp thy cardinals hat:
In spite of pope or dignities of church,
Here by the cheeks Ill drag thee up and down.
BISHOP
Gloucester, thou wilt answer this before the pope.
Winchester goose, I cry, a rope! a rope!
Now beat them hence; why do you let them stay?
Thee Ill chase hence, thou wolf in sheeps array.
Out, tawny coats! out, scarlet hypocrite!
Here GLOUCESTERs men beat out BISHOP OF  WINCHESTERs men, and enter in the hurly- burly the Mayor of London and his Officers
Fie, lords! that you, being supreme magistrates,
Thus contumeliously should break the peace!
Peace, mayor! thou knowst little of my wrongs:
Heres Beaufort, that regards nor God nor king,
Hath here distraind the Tower to his use.
BISHOP
Heres Gloucester, a foe to citizens,
One that still motions war and never peace,
Oercharging your free purses with large fines,
That seeks to overthrow religion,
Because he is protector of the realm,
And would have armour here out of the Tower,
To crown himself king and suppress the prince.
I will not answer thee with words, but blows.
Here they skirmish again
Naught rests for me in this tumultuous strife
But to make open proclamation:
Come, officer; as loud as eer thou canst,
Cry.
All manner of men assembled here in arms this day
against Gods peace and the kings, we charge and
command you, in his highness name, to repair to
your several dwelling-places; and not to wear,
handle, or use any sword, weapon, or dagger,
henceforward, upon pain of death.
Cardinal, Ill be no breaker of the law:
But we shall meet, and break our minds at large.
BISHOP
Gloucester, we will meet; to thy cost, be sure:
Thy heart-blood I will have for this days work.
Ill call for clubs, if you will not away.
This cardinals more haughty than the devil.
Mayor, farewell: thou dost but what thou mayst.
BISHOP
Abominable Gloucester, guard thy head;
For I intend to have it ere long.
Exeunt, severally, GLOUCESTER and BISHOP OF WINCHESTER with their Serving-men
See the coast cleard, and then we will depart.
Good God, these nobles should such stomachs bear!
I myself fight not once in forty year.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Orleans.
Enter, on the walls, a Master Gunner and his Boy
Master-GunnerSirrah, thou knowst how Orleans is besieged,
And how the English have the suburbs won.
Father, I know; and oft have shot at them,
Howeer unfortunate I missd my aim.
Master-GunnerBut now thou shalt not. Be thou ruled by me:
Chief master-gunner am I of this town;
Something I must do to procure me grace.
The princes espials have informed me
How the English, in the suburbs close intrenchd,
Wont, through a secret grate of iron bars
In yonder tower, to overpeer the city,
And thence discover how with most advantage
They may vex us with shot, or with assault.
To intercept this inconvenience,
A piece of ordnance gainst it I have placed;
And even these three days have I watchd,
If I could see them.
Now do thou watch, for I can stay no longer.
If thou spyst any, run and bring me word;
And thou shalt find me at the governors.
Exit
Father, I warrant you; take you no care;
Ill never trouble you, if I may spy them.
Exit
Enter, on the turrets, SALISBURY and TALBOT, GLANSDALE, GARGRAVE, and others
Talbot, my life, my joy, again returnd!
How wert thou handled being prisoner?
Or by what means gotst thou to be released?
Discourse, I prithee, on this turrets top.
The Duke of Bedford had a prisoner
Calld the brave Lord Ponton de Santrailles;
For him was I exchanged and ransomed.
But with a baser man of arms by far
Once in contempt they would have barterd me:
Which I, disdaining, scornd; and craved death,
Rather than I would be so vile esteemd.
In fine, redeemd I was as I desired.
But, O! the treacherous Fastolfe wounds my heart,
Whom with my bare fists I would execute,
If I now had him brought into my power.
Yet tellst thou not how thou wert entertaind.
With scoffs and scorns and contumelious taunts.
In open market-place produced they me,
To be a public spectacle to all:
Here, said they, is the terror of the French,
The scarecrow that affrights our children so.
Then broke I from the officers that led me,
And with my nails diggd stones out of the ground,
To hurl at the beholders of my shame:
My grisly countenance made others fly;
None durst come near for fear of sudden death.
In iron walls they deemd me not secure;
So great fear of my name mongst them was spread,
That they supposed I could rend bars of steel,
And spurn in pieces posts of adamant:
Wherefore a guard of chosen shot I had,
That walked about me every minute-while;
And if I did but stir out of my bed,
Ready they were to shoot me to the heart.
Enter the Boy with a linstock
I grieve to hear what torments you endured,
But we will be revenged sufficiently
Now it is supper-time in Orleans:
Here, through this grate, I count each one
and view the Frenchmen how they fortify:
Let us look in; the sight will much delight thee.
Sir Thomas Gargrave, and Sir William Glansdale,
Let me have your express opinions
Where is best place to make our battery next.
I think, at the north gate; for there stand lords.
And I, here, at the bulwark of the bridge.
For aught I see, this city must be famishd,
Or with light skirmishes enfeebled.
Here they shoot. SALISBURY and GARGRAVE fall
O Lord, have mercy on us, wretched sinners!
O Lord, have mercy on me, woful man!
What chance is this that suddenly hath crossd us?
Speak, Salisbury; at least, if thou canst speak:
How farest thou, mirror of all martial men?
One of thy eyes and thy cheeks side struck off!
Accursed tower! accursed fatal hand
That hath contrived this woful tragedy!
In thirteen battles Salisbury oercame;
Henry the Fifth he first traind to the wars;
Whilst any trump did sound, or drum struck up,
His sword did neer leave striking in the field.
Yet livest thou, Salisbury? though thy speech doth fail,
One eye thou hast, to look to heaven for grace:
The sun with one eye vieweth all the world.
Heaven, be thou gracious to none alive,
If Salisbury wants mercy at thy hands!
Bear hence his body; I will help to bury it.
Sir Thomas Gargrave, hast thou any life?
Speak unto Talbot; nay, look up to him.
Salisbury, cheer thy spirit with this comfort;
Thou shalt not die whiles--
He beckons with his hand and smiles on me.
As who should say When I am dead and gone,
Remember to avenge me on the French.
Plantagenet, I will; and like thee, Nero,
Play on the lute, beholding the towns burn:
Wretched shall France be only in my name.
Here an alarum, and it thunders and lightens
What stir is this? what tumults in the heavens?
Whence cometh this alarum and the noise?
Enter a Messenger
My lord, my lord, the French have gathered head:
The Dauphin, with one Joan la Pucelle joind,
A holy prophetess new risen up,
Is come with a great power to raise the siege.
Here SALISBURY lifteth himself up and groans
Hear, hear how dying Salisbury doth groan!
It irks his heart he cannot be revenged.
Frenchmen, Ill be a Salisbury to you:
Pucelle or puzzel, dolphin or dogfish,
Your hearts Ill stamp out with my horses heels,
And make a quagmire of your mingled brains.
Convey me Salisbury into his tent,
And then well try what these dastard Frenchmen dare.
Alarum. Exeunt
SCENE V. The same.
Here an alarum again: and TALBOT pursueth the  DAUPHIN, and driveth him: then enter JOAN LA  PUCELLE, driving Englishmen before her, and exit after them then re-enter TALBOT
Where is my strength, my valour, and my force?
Our English troops retire, I cannot stay them:
A woman clad in armour chaseth them.
Re-enter JOAN LA PUCELLE
Here, here she comes. Ill have a bout with thee;
Devil or devils dam, Ill conjure thee:
Blood will I draw on thee, thou art a witch,
And straightway give thy soul to him thou servest.
Come, come, tis only I that must disgrace thee.
Here they fight
Heavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail?
My breast Ill burst with straining of my courage
And from my shoulders crack my arms asunder.
But I will chastise this high-minded strumpet.
They fight again
Talbot, farewell; thy hour is not yet come:
I must go victual Orleans forthwith.
A short alarum; then enter the town with soldiers
Oertake me, if thou canst; I scorn thy strength.
Go, go, cheer up thy hungry-starved men;
Help Salisbury to make his testament:
This day is ours, as many more shall be.
Exit
My thoughts are whirled like a potters wheel;
I know not where I am, nor what I do;
A witch, by fear, not force, like Hannibal,
Drives back our troops and conquers as she lists:
So bees with smoke and doves with noisome stench
Are from their hives and houses driven away.
They calld us for our fierceness English dogs;
Now, like to whelps, we crying run away.
A short alarum
Hark, countrymen! either renew the fight,
Or tear the lions out of Englands coat;
Renounce your soil, give sheep in lions stead:
Sheep run not half so treacherous from the wolf,
Or horse or oxen from the leopard,
As you fly from your oft-subdued slaves.
Alarum. Here another skirmish
It will not be: retire into your trenches:
You all consented unto Salisburys death,
For none would strike a stroke in his revenge.
Pucelle is enterd into Orleans,
In spite of us or aught that we could do.
O, would I were to die with Salisbury!
The shame hereof will make me hide my head.
Exit TALBOT. Alarum; retreat; flourish
SCENE VI. The same.
Enter, on the walls, JOAN LA PUCELLE, CHARLES, REIGNIER, ALENCON, and Soldiers
Advance our waving colours on the walls;
Rescued is Orleans from the English
Thus Joan la Pucelle hath performd her word.
Divinest creature, Astraeas daughter,
How shall I honour thee for this success?
Thy promises are like Adonis gardens
That one day bloomd and fruitful were the next.
France, triumph in thy glorious prophetess!
Recoverd is the town of Orleans:
More blessed hap did neer befall our state.
Why ring not out the bells aloud throughout the town?
Dauphin, command the citizens make bonfires
And feast and banquet in the open streets,
To celebrate the joy that God hath given us.
All France will be replete with mirth and joy,
When they shall hear how we have playd the men.
Tis Joan, not we, by whom the day is won;
For which I will divide my crown with her,
And all the priests and friars in my realm
Shall in procession sing her endless praise.
A statelier pyramis to her Ill rear
Than Rhodopes or Memphis ever was:
In memory of her when she is dead,
Her ashes, in an urn more precious
Than the rich-jeweld of Darius,
Transported shall be at high festivals
Before the kings and queens of France.
No longer on Saint Denis will we cry,
But Joan la Pucelle shall be Frances saint.
Come in, and let us banquet royally,
After this golden day of victory.
Flourish. Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Before Orleans.
Enter a Sergeant of a band with two Sentinels
Sirs, take your places and be vigilant:
If any noise or soldier you perceive
Near to the walls, by some apparent sign
Let us have knowledge at the court of guard.
Sergeant, you shall.
Exit Sergeant
Thus are poor servitors,
When others sleep upon their quiet beds,
Constraind to watch in darkness, rain and cold.
Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, and Forces, with scaling-ladders, their drums beating a dead march
Lord Regent, and redoubted Burgundy,
By whose approach the regions of Artois,
Wallon and Picardy are friends to us,
This happy night the Frenchmen are secure,
Having all day caroused and banqueted:
Embrace we then this opportunity
As fitting best to quittance their deceit
Contrived by art and baleful sorcery.
Coward of France! how much he wrongs his fame,
Despairing of his own arms fortitude,
To join with witches and the help of hell!
Traitors have never other company.
But whats that Pucelle whom they term so pure?
A maid, they say.
A maid! and be so martial!
Pray God she prove not masculine ere long,
If underneath the standard of the French
She carry armour as she hath begun.
Well, let them practise and converse with spirits:
God is our fortress, in whose conquering name
Let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.
Ascend, brave Talbot; we will follow thee.
Not all together: better far, I guess,
That we do make our entrance several ways;
That, if it chance the one of us do fail,
The other yet may rise against their force.
Agreed: Ill to yond corner.
And I to this.
And here will Talbot mount, or make his grave.
Now, Salisbury, for thee, and for the right
Of English Henry, shall this night appear
How much in duty I am bound to both.
Arm! arm! the enemy doth make assault!
Cry: St. George, A Talbot.
The French leap over the walls in their shirts.  Enter, several ways, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, half ready, and half unready
How now, my lords! what, all unready so?
Unready! ay, and glad we scaped so well.
Twas time, I trow, to wake and leave our beds,
Hearing alarums at our chamber-doors.
Of all exploits since first I followd arms,
Neer heard I of a warlike enterprise
More venturous or desperate than this.
I think this Talbot be a fiend of hell.
If not of hell, the heavens, sure, favour him.
Here cometh Charles: I marvel how he sped.
Tut, holy Joan was his defensive guard.
Enter CHARLES and JOAN LA PUCELLE
Is this thy cunning, thou deceitful dame?
Didst thou at first, to flatter us withal,
Make us partakers of a little gain,
That now our loss might be ten times so much?
Wherefore is Charles impatient with his friend!
At all times will you have my power alike?
Sleeping or waking must I still prevail,
Or will you blame and lay the fault on me?
Improvident soldiers! had your watch been good,
This sudden mischief never could have falln.
Duke of Alencon, this was your default,
That, being captain of the watch to-night,
Did look no better to that weighty charge.
Had all your quarters been as safely kept
As that whereof I had the government,
We had not been thus shamefully surprised.
Mine was secure.
And so was mine, my lord.
And, for myself, most part of all this night,
Within her quarter and mine own precinct
I was employd in passing to and fro,
About relieving of the sentinels:
Then how or which way should they first break in?
Question, my lords, no further of the case,
How or which way: tis sure they found some place
But weakly guarded, where the breach was made.
And now there rests no other shift but this;
To gather our soldiers, scatterd and dispersed,
And lay new platforms to endamage them.
Alarum. Enter an English Soldier, crying A  Talbot! a Talbot! They fly, leaving their clothes behind
Ill be so bold to take what they have left.
The cry of Talbot serves me for a sword;
For I have loaden me with many spoils,
Using no other weapon but his name.
Exit
SCENE II. Orleans. Within the town.
Enter TALBOT, BEDFORD, BURGUNDY, a Captain, and others
The day begins to break, and night is fled,
Whose pitchy mantle over-veild the earth.
Here sound retreat, and cease our hot pursuit.
Retreat sounded
Bring forth the body of old Salisbury,
And here advance it in the market-place,
The middle centre of this cursed town.
Now have I paid my vow unto his soul;
For every drop of blood was drawn from him,
There hath at least five Frenchmen died tonight.
And that hereafter ages may behold
What ruin happend in revenge of him,
Within their chiefest temple Ill erect
A tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interrd:
Upon the which, that every one may read,
Shall be engraved the sack of Orleans,
The treacherous manner of his mournful death
And what a terror he had been to France.
But, lords, in all our bloody massacre,
I muse we met not with the Dauphins grace,
His new-come champion, virtuous Joan of Arc,
Nor any of his false confederates.
Tis thought, Lord Talbot, when the fight began,
Roused on the sudden from their drowsy beds,
They did amongst the troops of armed men
Leap oer the walls for refuge in the field.
Myself, as far as I could well discern
For smoke and dusky vapours of the night,
Am sure I scared the Dauphin and his trull,
When arm in arm they both came swiftly running,
Like to a pair of loving turtle-doves
That could not live asunder day or night.
After that things are set in order here,
Well follow them with all the power we have.
