Enter a Messenger
All hail, my lords! which of this princely train
Call ye the warlike Talbot, for his acts
So much applauded through the realm of France?
Here is the Talbot: who would speak with him?
The virtuous lady, Countess of Auvergne,
With modesty admiring thy renown,
By me entreats, great lord, thou wouldst vouchsafe
To visit her poor castle where she lies,
That she may boast she hath beheld the man
Whose glory fills the world with loud report.
Is it even so? Nay, then, I see our wars
Will turn unto a peaceful comic sport,
When ladies crave to be encounterd with.
You may not, my lord, despise her gentle suit.
Neer trust me then; for when a world of men
Could not prevail with all their oratory,
Yet hath a womans kindness over-ruled:
And therefore tell her I return great thanks,
And in submission will attend on her.
Will not your honours bear me company?
No, truly; it is more than manners will:
And I have heard it said, unbidden guests
Are often welcomest when they are gone.
Well then, alone, since theres no remedy,
I mean to prove this ladys courtesy.
Come hither, captain.
Whispers
You perceive my mind?
I do, my lord, and mean accordingly.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Auvergne. The COUNTESSs castle.
Enter the COUNTESS and her Porter
COUNTESS
Porter, remember what I gave in charge;
And when you have done so, bring the keys to me.
Madam, I will.
Exit
COUNTESS
The plot is laid: if all things fall out right,
I shall as famous be by this exploit
As Scythian Tomyris by Cyrus death.
Great is the rumor of this dreadful knight,
And his achievements of no less account:
Fain would mine eyes be witness with mine ears,
To give their censure of these rare reports.
Enter Messenger and TALBOT
Madam,
According as your ladyship desired,
By message craved, so is Lord Talbot come.
COUNTESS
And he is welcome. What! is this the man?
Madam, it is.
COUNTESS
Is this the scourge of France?
Is this the Talbot, so much feard abroad
That with his name the mothers still their babes?
I see report is fabulous and false:
I thought I should have seen some Hercules,
A second Hector, for his grim aspect,
And large proportion of his strong-knit limbs.
Alas, this is a child, a silly dwarf!
It cannot be this weak and writhled shrimp
Should strike such terror to his enemies.
Madam, I have been bold to trouble you;
But since your ladyship is not at leisure,
Ill sort some other time to visit you.
COUNTESS
What means he now? Go ask him whither he goes.
Stay, my Lord Talbot; for my lady craves
To know the cause of your abrupt departure.
Marry, for that shes in a wrong belief,
I go to certify her Talbots here.
Re-enter Porter with keys
COUNTESS
If thou be he, then art thou prisoner.
Prisoner! to whom?
COUNTESS
To me, blood-thirsty lord;
And for that cause I trained thee to my house.
Long time thy shadow hath been thrall to me,
For in my gallery thy picture hangs:
But now the substance shall endure the like,
And I will chain these legs and arms of thine,
That hast by tyranny these many years
Wasted our country, slain our citizens
And sent our sons and husbands captivate.
Ha, ha, ha!
COUNTESS
Laughest thou, wretch? thy mirth shall turn to moan.
I laugh to see your ladyship so fond
To think that you have aught but Talbots shadow
Whereon to practise your severity.
COUNTESS
Why, art not thou the man?
I am indeed.
COUNTESS
Then have I substance too.
No, no, I am but shadow of myself:
You are deceived, my substance is not here;
For what you see is but the smallest part
And least proportion of humanity:
I tell you, madam, were the whole frame here,
It is of such a spacious lofty pitch,
Your roof were not sufficient to containt.
COUNTESS
This is a riddling merchant for the nonce;
He will be here, and yet he is not here:
How can these contrarieties agree?
That will I show you presently.
Winds his horn. Drums strike up: a peal of ordnance. Enter soldiers
How say you, madam? are you now persuaded
That Talbot is but shadow of himself?
These are his substance, sinews, arms and strength,
With which he yoketh your rebellious necks,
Razeth your cities and subverts your towns
And in a moment makes them desolate.
COUNTESS
Victorious Talbot! pardon my abuse:
I find thou art no less than fame hath bruited
And more than may be gatherd by thy shape.
Let my presumption not provoke thy wrath;
For I am sorry that with reverence
I did not entertain thee as thou art.
Be not dismayd, fair lady; nor misconstrue
The mind of Talbot, as you did mistake
The outward composition of his body.
What you have done hath not offended me;
Nor other satisfaction do I crave,
But only, with your patience, that we may
Taste of your wine and see what cates you have;
For soldiers stomachs always serve them well.
COUNTESS
With all my heart, and think me honoured
To feast so great a warrior in my house.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. London. The Temple-garden.
Enter the Earls of SOMERSET, SUFFOLK, and WARWICK; RICHARD PLANTAGENET, VERNON, and another Lawyer
RICHARD
Great lords and gentlemen, what means this silence?
Dare no man answer in a case of truth?
Within the Temple-hall we were too loud;
The garden here is more convenient.
RICHARD
Then say at once if I maintaind the truth;
Or else was wrangling Somerset in the error?
Faith, I have been a truant in the law,
And never yet could frame my will to it;
And therefore frame the law unto my will.
Judge you, my Lord of Warwick, then, between us.
Between two hawks, which flies the higher pitch;
Between two dogs, which hath the deeper mouth;
Between two blades, which bears the better temper:
Between two horses, which doth bear him best;
Between two girls, which hath the merriest eye;
I have perhaps some shallow spirit of judgement;
But in these nice sharp quillets of the law,
Good faith, I am no wiser than a daw.
RICHARD
Tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance:
The truth appears so naked on my side
That any purblind eye may find it out.
And on my side it is so well apparelld,
So clear, so shining and so evident
That it will glimmer through a blind mans eye.
RICHARD
Since you are tongue-tied and so loath to speak,
In dumb significants proclaim your thoughts:
Let him that is a true-born gentleman
And stands upon the honour of his birth,
If he suppose that I have pleaded truth,
From off this brier pluck a white rose with me.
Let him that is no coward nor no flatterer,
But dare maintain the party of the truth,
Pluck a red rose from off this thorn with me.
I love no colours, and without all colour
Of base insinuating flattery
I pluck this white rose with Plantagenet.
I pluck this red rose with young Somerset
And say withal I think he held the right.
Stay, lords and gentlemen, and pluck no more,
Till you conclude that he upon whose side
The fewest roses are croppd from the tree
Shall yield the other in the right opinion.
Good Master Vernon, it is well objected:
If I have fewest, I subscribe in silence.
RICHARD
And I.
Then for the truth and plainness of the case.
I pluck this pale and maiden blossom here,
Giving my verdict on the white rose side.
Prick not your finger as you pluck it off,
Lest bleeding you do paint the white rose red
And fall on my side so, against your will.
If I my lord, for my opinion bleed,
Opinion shall be surgeon to my hurt
And keep me on the side where still I am.
Well, well, come on: who else?
Unless my study and my books be false,
The argument you held was wrong in you:
To SOMERSET
In sign whereof I pluck a white rose too.
RICHARD
Now, Somerset, where is your argument?
Here in my scabbard, meditating that
Shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.
RICHARD
Meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses;
For pale they look with fear, as witnessing
The truth on our side.
No, Plantagenet,
Tis not for fear but anger that thy cheeks
Blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses,
And yet thy tongue will not confess thy error.
RICHARD
Hath not thy rose a canker, Somerset?
Hath not thy rose a thorn, Plantagenet?
RICHARD
Ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth;
Whiles thy consuming canker eats his falsehood.
Well, Ill find friends to wear my bleeding roses,
That shall maintain what I have said is true,
Where false Plantagenet dare not be seen.
RICHARD
Now, by this maiden blossom in my hand,
I scorn thee and thy fashion, peevish boy.
Turn not thy scorns this way, Plantagenet.
RICHARD
Proud Pole, I will, and scorn both him and thee.
Ill turn my part thereof into thy throat.
Away, away, good William de la Pole!
We grace the yeoman by conversing with him.
Now, by Gods will, thou wrongst him, Somerset;
His grandfather was Lionel Duke of Clarence,
Third son to the third Edward King of England:
Spring crestless yeomen from so deep a root?
RICHARD
He bears him on the places privilege,
Or durst not, for his craven heart, say thus.
By him that made me, Ill maintain my words
On any plot of ground in Christendom.
Was not thy father, Richard Earl of Cambridge,
For treason executed in our late kings days?
And, by his treason, standst not thou attainted,
Corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry?
His trespass yet lives guilty in thy blood;
And, till thou be restored, thou art a yeoman.
RICHARD
My father was attached, not attainted,
Condemnd to die for treason, but no traitor;
And that Ill prove on better men than Somerset,
Were growing time once ripend to my will.
For your partaker Pole and you yourself,
Ill note you in my book of memory,
To scourge you for this apprehension:
Look to it well and say you are well warnd.
Ah, thou shalt find us ready for thee still;
And know us by these colours for thy foes,
For these my friends in spite of thee shall wear.
RICHARD
And, by my soul, this pale and angry rose,
As cognizance of my blood-drinking hate,
Will I for ever and my faction wear,
Until it wither with me to my grave
Or flourish to the height of my degree.
Go forward and be choked with thy ambition!
And so farewell until I meet thee next.
Exit
Have with thee, Pole. Farewell, ambitious Richard.
Exit
RICHARD
How I am braved and must perforce endure it!
This blot that they object against your house
Shall be wiped out in the next parliament
Calld for the truce of Winchester and Gloucester;
And if thou be not then created York,
I will not live to be accounted Warwick.
Meantime, in signal of my love to thee,
Against proud Somerset and William Pole,
Will I upon thy party wear this rose:
And here I prophesy: this brawl to-day,
Grown to this faction in the Temple-garden,
Shall send between the red rose and the white
A thousand souls to death and deadly night.
RICHARD
Good Master Vernon, I am bound to you,
That you on my behalf would pluck a flower.
In your behalf still will I wear the same.
And so will I.
RICHARD
Thanks, gentle sir.
Come, let us four to dinner: I dare say
This quarrel will drink blood another day.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The Tower of London.
Enter MORTIMER, brought in a chair, and Gaolers
Kind keepers of my weak decaying age,
Let dying Mortimer here rest himself.
Even like a man new haled from the rack,
So fare my limbs with long imprisonment.
And these grey locks, the pursuivants of death,
Nestor-like aged in an age of care,
Argue the end of Edmund Mortimer.
These eyes, like lamps whose wasting oil is spent,
Wax dim, as drawing to their exigent;
Weak shoulders, overborne with burthening grief,
And pithless arms, like to a witherd vine
That droops his sapless branches to the ground;
Yet are these feet, whose strengthless stay is numb,
Unable to support this lump of clay,
Swift-winged with desire to get a grave,
As witting I no other comfort have.
But tell me, keeper, will my nephew come?
Richard Plantagenet, my lord, will come:
We sent unto the Temple, unto his chamber;
And answer was returnd that he will come.
Enough: my soul shall then be satisfied.
Poor gentleman! his wrong doth equal mine.
Since Henry Monmouth first began to reign,
Before whose glory I was great in arms,
This loathsome sequestration have I had:
And even since then hath Richard been obscured,
Deprived of honour and inheritance.
But now the arbitrator of despairs,
Just death, kind umpire of mens miseries,
With sweet enlargement doth dismiss me hence:
I would his troubles likewise were expired,
That so he might recover what was lost.
Enter RICHARD PLANTAGENET
My lord, your loving nephew now is come.
Richard Plantagenet, my friend, is he come?
RICHARD
Ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used,
Your nephew, late despised Richard, comes.
Direct mine arms I may embrace his neck,
And in his bosom spend my latter gasp:
O, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks,
That I may kindly give one fainting kiss.
And now declare, sweet stem from Yorks great stock,
Why didst thou say, of late thou wert despised?
RICHARD
First, lean thine aged back against mine arm;
And, in that ease, Ill tell thee my disease.
This day, in argument upon a case,
Some words there grew twixt Somerset and me;
Among which terms he used his lavish tongue
And did upbraid me with my fathers death:
Which obloquy set bars before my tongue,
Else with the like I had requited him.
Therefore, good uncle, for my fathers sake,
In honour of a true Plantagenet
And for alliance sake, declare the cause
My father, Earl of Cambridge, lost his head.
That cause, fair nephew, that imprisond me
And hath detaind me all my flowering youth
Within a loathsome dungeon, there to pine,
Was cursed instrument of his decease.
RICHARD
Discover more at large what cause that was,
For I am ignorant and cannot guess.
I will, if that my fading breath permit
And death approach not ere my tale be done.
Henry the Fourth, grandfather to this king,
Deposed his nephew Richard, Edwards son,
The first-begotten and the lawful heir,
Of Edward king, the third of that descent:
During whose reign the Percies of the north,
Finding his usurpation most unjust,
Endeavord my advancement to the throne:
The reason moved these warlike lords to this
Was, for that--young King Richard thus removed,
Leaving no heir begotten of his body--
I was the next by birth and parentage;
For by my mother I derived am
From Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third son
To King Edward the Third; whereas he
From John of Gaunt doth bring his pedigree,
Being but fourth of that heroic line.
But mark: as in this haughty attempt
They laboured to plant the rightful heir,
I lost my liberty and they their lives.
Long after this, when Henry the Fifth,
Succeeding his father Bolingbroke, did reign,
Thy father, Earl of Cambridge, then derived
From famous Edmund Langley, Duke of York,
Marrying my sister that thy mother was,
Again in pity of my hard distress
Levied an army, weening to redeem
And have installd me in the diadem:
But, as the rest, so fell that noble earl
And was beheaded. Thus the Mortimers,
In whom the tide rested, were suppressd.
RICHARD
Of which, my lord, your honour is the last.
True; and thou seest that I no issue have
And that my fainting words do warrant death;
Thou art my heir; the rest I wish thee gather:
But yet be wary in thy studious care.
RICHARD
Thy grave admonishments prevail with me:
But yet, methinks, my fathers execution
Was nothing less than bloody tyranny.
With silence, nephew, be thou politic:
Strong-fixed is the house of Lancaster,
And like a mountain, not to be removed.
But now thy uncle is removing hence:
As princes do their courts, when they are cloyd
With long continuance in a settled place.
RICHARD
O, uncle, would some part of my young years
Might but redeem the passage of your age!
Thou dost then wrong me, as that slaughterer doth
Which giveth many wounds when one will kill.
Mourn not, except thou sorrow for my good;
Only give order for my funeral:
And so farewell, and fair be all thy hopes
And prosperous be thy life in peace and war!
Dies
RICHARD
And peace, no war, befall thy parting soul!
In prison hast thou spent a pilgrimage
And like a hermit overpassd thy days.
Well, I will lock his counsel in my breast;
And what I do imagine let that rest.
Keepers, convey him hence, and I myself
Will see his burial better than his life.
Exeunt Gaolers, bearing out the body of MORTIMER
Here dies the dusky torch of Mortimer,
Choked with ambition of the meaner sort:
And for those wrongs, those bitter injuries,
Which Somerset hath offerd to my house:
I doubt not but with honour to redress;
And therefore haste I to the parliament,
Either to be restored to my blood,
Or make my ill the advantage of my good.
Exit
ACT III
SCENE I. London. The Parliament-house.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, EXETER, GLOUCESTER,  WARWICK, SOMERSET, and SUFFOLK; the BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER, RICHARD PLANTAGENET, and others.  GLOUCESTER offers to put up a bill; BISHOP OF WINCHESTER snatches it, and tears it
BISHOP
Comest thou with deep premeditated lines,
With written pamphlets studiously devised,
Humphrey of Gloucester? If thou canst accuse,
Or aught intendst to lay unto my charge,
Do it without invention, suddenly;
As I with sudden and extemporal speech
Purpose to answer what thou canst object.
Presumptuous priest! this place commands my patience,
Or thou shouldst find thou hast dishonourd me.
Think not, although in writing I preferrd
The manner of thy vile outrageous crimes,
That therefore I have forged, or am not able
Verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen:
No, prelate; such is thy audacious wickedness,
Thy lewd, pestiferous and dissentious pranks,
As very infants prattle of thy pride.
Thou art a most pernicious usurer,
Forward by nature, enemy to peace;
Lascivious, wanton, more than well beseems
A man of thy profession and degree;
And for thy treachery, whats more manifest?
In that thou laidst a trap to take my life,
As well at London bridge as at the Tower.
Beside, I fear me, if thy thoughts were sifted,
The king, thy sovereign, is not quite exempt
From envious malice of thy swelling heart.
BISHOP
Gloucester, I do defy thee. Lords, vouchsafe
To give me hearing what I shall reply.
If I were covetous, ambitious or perverse,
As he will have me, how am I so poor?
Or how haps it I seek not to advance
Or raise myself, but keep my wonted calling?
And for dissension, who preferreth peace
More than I do?--except I be provoked.
No, my good lords, it is not that offends;
It is not that that hath incensed the duke:
It is, because no one should sway but he;
No one but he should be about the king;
And that engenders thunder in his breast
And makes him roar these accusations forth.
But he shall know I am as good--
As good!
Thou bastard of my grandfather!
BISHOP
Ay, lordly sir; for what are you, I pray,
But one imperious in anothers throne?
Am I not protector, saucy priest?
BISHOP
And am not I a prelate of the church?
Yes, as an outlaw in a castle keeps
And useth it to patronage his theft.
BISHOP
Unreverent Gloster!
Thou art reverent
Touching thy spiritual function, not thy life.
BISHOP
Rome shall remedy this.
Roam thither, then.
My lord, it were your duty to forbear.
Ay, see the bishop be not overborne.
Methinks my lord should be religious
And know the office that belongs to such.
Methinks his lordship should be humbler;
it fitteth not a prelate so to plead.
Yes, when his holy state is touchd so near.
State holy or unhallowd, what of that?
Is not his grace protector to the king?
RICHARD
[Aside]  Plantagenet, I see, must hold his tongue,
Lest it be said Speak, sirrah, when you should;
Must your bold verdict enter talk with lords?
Else would I have a fling at Winchester.
Uncles of Gloucester and of Winchester,
The special watchmen of our English weal,
I would prevail, if prayers might prevail,
To join your hearts in love and amity.
O, what a scandal is it to our crown,
That two such noble peers as ye should jar!
Believe me, lords, my tender years can tell
Civil dissension is a viperous worm
That gnaws the bowels of the commonwealth.
A noise within, Down with the tawny-coats!
What tumults this?
An uproar, I dare warrant,
Begun through malice of the bishops men.
A noise again, Stones! stones! Enter Mayor
O, my good lords, and virtuous Henry,
Pity the city of London, pity us!
The bishop and the Duke of Gloucesters men,
Forbidden late to carry any weapon,
Have filld their pockets full of pebble stones
And banding themselves in contrary parts
Do pelt so fast at one anothers pate
That many have their giddy brains knockd out:
Our windows are broke down in every street
And we for fear compelld to shut our shops.
Enter Serving-men, in skirmish, with bloody pates
We charge you, on allegiance to ourself,
To hold your slaughtering hands and keep the peace.
Pray, uncle Gloucester, mitigate this strife.
First Serving-manNay, if we be forbidden stones,
Well fall to it with our teeth.
Second Serving-manDo what ye dare, we are as resolute.
Skirmish again
You of my household, leave this peevish broil
And set this unaccustomd fight aside.
Third Serving-manMy lord, we know your grace to be a man
Just and upright; and, for your royal birth,
Inferior to none but to his majesty:
And ere that we will suffer such a prince,
So kind a father of the commonweal,
To be disgraced by an inkhorn mate,
We and our wives and children all will fight
And have our bodies slaughtered by thy foes.
First Serving-manAy, and the very parings of our nails
Shall pitch a field when we are dead.
Begin again
Stay, stay, I say!
And if you love me, as you say you do,
Let me persuade you to forbear awhile.
O, how this discord doth afflict my soul!
Can you, my Lord of Winchester, behold
My sighs and tears and will not once relent?
Who should be pitiful, if you be not?
Or who should study to prefer a peace.
If holy churchmen take delight in broils?
Yield, my lord protector; yield, Winchester;
Except you mean with obstinate repulse
To slay your sovereign and destroy the realm.
You see what mischief and what murder too
Hath been enacted through your enmity;
Then be at peace except ye thirst for blood.
BISHOP
He shall submit, or I will never yield.
Compassion on the king commands me stoop;
Or I would see his heart out, ere the priest
Should ever get that privilege of me.
Behold, my Lord of Winchester, the duke
Hath banishd moody discontented fury,
As by his smoothed brows it doth appear:
Why look you still so stern and tragical?
Here, Winchester, I offer thee my hand.
Fie, uncle Beaufort! I have heard you preach
That malice was a great and grievous sin;
And will not you maintain the thing you teach,
But prove a chief offender in the same?
Sweet king! the bishop hath a kindly gird.
For shame, my lord of Winchester, relent!
What, shall a child instruct you what to do?
BISHOP
Well, Duke of Gloucester, I will yield to thee;
Love for thy love and hand for hand I give.
[Aside]  Ay, but, I fear me, with a hollow heart.--
See here, my friends and loving countrymen,
This token serveth for a flag of truce
Betwixt ourselves and all our followers:
So help me God, as I dissemble not!
BISHOP
[Aside]  So help me God, as I intend it not!
O, loving uncle, kind Duke of Gloucester,
How joyful am I made by this contract!
Away, my masters! trouble us no more;
But join in friendship, as your lords have done.
First Serving-manContent: Ill to the surgeons.
Second Serving-manAnd so will I.
Third Serving-manAnd I will see what physic the tavern affords.
Exeunt Serving-men, Mayor,  and c
Accept this scroll, most gracious sovereign,
Which in the right of Richard Plantagenet
We do exhibit to your majesty.
Well urged, my Lord of Warwick: or sweet prince,
And if your grace mark every circumstance,
You have great reason to do Richard right;
Especially for those occasions
At Eltham Place I told your majesty.
And those occasions, uncle, were of force:
Therefore, my loving lords, our pleasure is
That Richard be restored to his blood.
Let Richard be restored to his blood;
So shall his fathers wrongs be recompensed.
BISHOP
As will the rest, so willeth Winchester.
If Richard will be true, not that alone
But all the whole inheritance I give
That doth belong unto the house of York,
From whence you spring by lineal descent.
RICHARD
Thy humble servant vows obedience
And humble service till the point of death.
Stoop then and set your knee against my foot;
And, in reguerdon of that duty done,
I gird thee with the valiant sword of York:
Rise Richard, like a true Plantagenet,
And rise created princely Duke of York.
RICHARD
And so thrive Richard as thy foes may fall!
And as my duty springs, so perish they
That grudge one thought against your majesty!
Welcome, high prince, the mighty Duke of York!
[Aside]  Perish, base prince, ignoble Duke of York!
Now will it best avail your majesty
To cross the seas and to be crownd in France:
The presence of a king engenders love
Amongst his subjects and his loyal friends,
As it disanimates his enemies.
When Gloucester says the word, King Henry goes;
For friendly counsel cuts off many foes.
Your ships already are in readiness.
Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but EXETER
Ay, we may march in England or in France,
Not seeing what is likely to ensue.
This late dissension grown betwixt the peers
Burns under feigned ashes of forged love
And will at last break out into a flame:
As festerd members rot but by degree,
Till bones and flesh and sinews fall away,
So will this base and envious discord breed.
And now I fear that fatal prophecy
Which in the time of Henry named the Fifth
Was in the mouth of every sucking babe;
That Henry born at Monmouth should win all
And Henry born at Windsor lose all:
Which is so plain that Exeter doth wish
His days may finish ere that hapless time.
Exit
SCENE II. France. Before Rouen.
Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE disguised, with four Soldiers with sacks upon their backs
These are the city gates, the gates of Rouen,
Through which our policy must make a breach:
Take heed, be wary how you place your words;
Talk like the vulgar sort of market men
That come to gather money for their corn.
If we have entrance, as I hope we shall,
And that we find the slothful watch but weak,
Ill by a sign give notice to our friends,
That Charles the Dauphin may encounter them.
Our sacks shall be a mean to sack the city,
And we be lords and rulers over Rouen;
Therefore well knock.
Knocks
[Within]  Qui est la?
Paysans, pauvres gens de France;
Poor market folks that come to sell their corn.
Enter, go in; the market bell is rung.
Now, Rouen, Ill shake thy bulwarks to the ground.
Exeunt
Enter CHARLES, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, REIGNIER, and forces
Saint Denis bless this happy stratagem!
And once again well sleep secure in Rouen.
Here enterd Pucelle and her practisants;
Now she is there, how will she specify
Where is the best and safest passage in?
By thrusting out a torch from yonder tower;
Which, once discernd, shows that her meaning is,
No way to that, for weakness, which she enterd.
Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE on the top, thrusting out a torch burning
Behold, this is the happy wedding torch
That joineth Rouen unto her countrymen,
But burning fatal to the Talbotites!
Exit
See, noble Charles, the beacon of our friend;
The burning torch in yonder turret stands.
Now shine it like a comet of revenge,
A prophet to the fall of all our foes!
Defer no time, delays have dangerous ends;
Enter, and cry The Dauphin! presently,
And then do execution on the watch.
Alarum. Exeunt
An alarum. Enter TALBOT in an excursion
France, thou shalt rue this treason with thy tears,
If Talbot but survive thy treachery.
Pucelle, that witch, that damned sorceress,
Hath wrought this hellish mischief unawares,
That hardly we escaped the pride of France.
Exit
An alarum: excursions. BEDFORD, brought in sick  in a chair. Enter TALBOT and BURGUNDY without:  within JOAN LA PUCELLE, CHARLES, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, and REIGNIER, on the walls
Good morrow, gallants! want ye corn for bread?
I think the Duke of Burgundy will fast
Before hell buy again at such a rate:
Twas full of darnel; do you like the taste?
Scoff on, vile fiend and shameless courtezan!
I trust ere long to choke thee with thine own
And make thee curse the harvest of that corn.
Your grace may starve perhaps before that time.
O, let no words, but deeds, revenge this treason!
What will you do, good grey-beard? break a lance,
And run a tilt at death within a chair?
Foul fiend of France, and hag of all despite,
Encompassd with thy lustful paramours!
Becomes it thee to taunt his valiant age
And twit with cowardice a man half dead?
Damsel, Ill have a bout with you again,
Or else let Talbot perish with this shame.
Are ye so hot, sir? yet, Pucelle, hold thy peace;
If Talbot do but thunder, rain will follow.
The English whisper together in council
God speed the parliament! who shall be the speaker?
Dare ye come forth and meet us in the field?
Belike your lordship takes us then for fools,
To try if that our own be ours or no.
I speak not to that railing Hecate,
But unto thee, Alencon, and the rest;
Will ye, like soldiers, come and fight it out?
Signior, no.
Signior, hang! base muleters of France!
Like peasant foot-boys do they keep the walls
And dare not take up arms like gentlemen.
Away, captains! lets get us from the walls;
For Talbot means no goodness by his looks.
God be wi you, my lord! we came but to tell you
That we are here.
Exeunt from the walls
And there will we be too, ere it be long,
Or else reproach be Talbots greatest fame!
Vow, Burgundy, by honour of thy house,
Prickd on by public wrongs sustaind in France,
Either to get the town again or die:
And I, as sure as English Henry lives
And as his father here was conqueror,
As sure as in this late-betrayed town
Great Coeur-de-lions heart was buried,
So sure I swear to get the town or die.
My vows are equal partners with thy vows.
But, ere we go, regard this dying prince,
The valiant Duke of Bedford. Come, my lord,
We will bestow you in some better place,
Fitter for sickness and for crazy age.
Lord Talbot, do not so dishonour me:
Here will I sit before the walls of Rouen
And will be partner of your weal or woe.
Courageous Bedford, let us now persuade you.
Not to be gone from hence; for once I read
That stout Pendragon in his litter sick
Came to the field and vanquished his foes:
Methinks I should revive the soldiers hearts,
Because I ever found them as myself.
Undaunted spirit in a dying breast!
Then be it so: heavens keep old Bedford safe!
And now no more ado, brave Burgundy,
But gather we our forces out of hand
And set upon our boasting enemy.
Exeunt all but BEDFORD and Attendants
An alarum: excursions. Enter FASTOLFE and a Captain
Whither away, Sir John Fastolfe, in such haste?
Whither away! to save myself by flight:
We are like to have the overthrow again.
What! will you fly, and leave Lord Talbot?
Ay,
All the Talbots in the world, to save my life!
Exit
Cowardly knight! ill fortune follow thee!
Exit
Retreat: excursions. JOAN LA PUCELLE, ALENCON, and CHARLES fly
Now, quiet soul, depart when heaven please,
For I have seen our enemies overthrow.
What is the trust or strength of foolish man?
They that of late were daring with their scoffs
Are glad and fain by flight to save themselves.
BEDFORD dies, and is carried in by two in his chair
An alarum. Re-enter TALBOT, BURGUNDY, and the rest
Lost, and recoverd in a day again!
This is a double honour, Burgundy:
Yet heavens have glory for this victory!
Warlike and martial Talbot, Burgundy
Enshrines thee in his heart and there erects
Thy noble deeds as valours monuments.
Thanks, gentle duke. But where is Pucelle now?
I think her old familiar is asleep:
Now wheres the Bastards braves, and Charles his gleeks?
What, all amort? Rouen hangs her head for grief
That such a valiant company are fled.
Now will we take some order in the town,
Placing therein some expert officers,
And then depart to Paris to the king,
For there young Henry with his nobles lie.
What wills Lord Talbot pleaseth Burgundy.
But yet, before we go, lets not forget
The noble Duke of Bedford late deceased,
But see his exequies fulfilld in Rouen:
A braver soldier never couched lance,
A gentler heart did never sway in court;
But kings and mightiest potentates must die,
For thats the end of human misery.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The plains near Rouen.
Enter CHARLES, the BASTARD OF ORLEANS, ALENCON, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forces
Dismay not, princes, at this accident,
Nor grieve that Rouen is so recovered:
Care is no cure, but rather corrosive,
For things that are not to be remedied.
Let frantic Talbot triumph for a while
And like a peacock sweep along his tail;
Well pull his plumes and take away his train,
If Dauphin and the rest will be but ruled.
We have been guided by thee hitherto,
And of thy cunning had no diffidence:
One sudden foil shall never breed distrust.
Search out thy wit for secret policies,
And we will make thee famous through the world.
Well set thy statue in some holy place,
And have thee reverenced like a blessed saint:
Employ thee then, sweet virgin, for our good.
Then thus it must be; this doth Joan devise:
By fair persuasions mixd with sugard words
We will entice the Duke of Burgundy
To leave the Talbot and to follow us.
Ay, marry, sweeting, if we could do that,
France were no place for Henrys warriors;
Nor should that nation boast it so with us,
But be extirped from our provinces.
For ever should they be expulsed from France
And not have title of an earldom here.
Your honours shall perceive how I will work
To bring this matter to the wished end.
Drum sounds afar off
Hark! by the sound of drum you may perceive
Their powers are marching unto Paris-ward.
Here sound an English march. Enter, and pass over at a distance, TALBOT and his forces
There goes the Talbot, with his colours spread,
And all the troops of English after him.
French march. Enter BURGUNDY and forces
Now in the rearward comes the duke and his:
Fortune in favour makes him lag behind.
Summon a parley; we will talk with him.
Trumpets sound a parley
A parley with the Duke of Burgundy!
Who craves a parley with the Burgundy?
The princely Charles of France, thy countryman.
What sayst thou, Charles? for I am marching hence.
Speak, Pucelle, and enchant him with thy words.
Brave Burgundy, undoubted hope of France!
Stay, let thy humble handmaid speak to thee.
Speak on; but be not over-tedious.
Look on thy country, look on fertile France,
And see the cities and the towns defaced
By wasting ruin of the cruel foe.
As looks the mother on her lowly babe
When death doth close his tender dying eyes,
See, see the pining malady of France;
Behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds,
Which thou thyself hast given her woful breast.
O, turn thy edged sword another way;
Strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help.
One drop of blood drawn from thy countrys bosom
Should grieve thee more than streams of foreign gore:
Return thee therefore with a flood of tears,
And wash away thy countrys stained spots.
Either she hath bewitchd me with her words,
Or nature makes me suddenly relent.
Besides, all French and France exclaims on thee,
Doubting thy birth and lawful progeny.
Who jointst thou with but with a lordly nation
That will not trust thee but for profits sake?
When Talbot hath set footing once in France
And fashiond thee that instrument of ill,
Who then but English Henry will be lord
And thou be thrust out like a fugitive?
Call we to mind, and mark but this for proof,
Was not the Duke of Orleans thy foe?
And was he not in England prisoner?
But when they heard he was thine enemy,
They set him free without his ransom paid,
In spite of Burgundy and all his friends.
See, then, thou fightst against thy countrymen
And jointst with them will be thy slaughtermen.
Come, come, return; return, thou wandering lord:
Charles and the rest will take thee in their arms.
I am vanquished; these haughty words of hers
Have batterd me like roaring cannon-shot,
And made me almost yield upon my knees.
Forgive me, country, and sweet countrymen,
And, lords, accept this hearty kind embrace:
My forces and my power of men are yours:
So farewell, Talbot; Ill no longer trust thee.
[Aside]  Done like a Frenchman: turn, and turn again!
Welcome, brave duke! thy friendship makes us fresh.
And doth beget new courage in our breasts.
Pucelle hath bravely playd her part in this,
And doth deserve a coronet of gold.
Now let us on, my lords, and join our powers,
And seek how we may prejudice the foe.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Paris. The palace.
Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, SOMERSET, WARWICK,  EXETER, VERNONBASSET, and others. To them with his Soldiers, TALBOT
My gracious prince, and honourable peers,
Hearing of your arrival in this realm,
I have awhile given truce unto my wars,
To do my duty to my sovereign:
In sign, whereof, this arm, that hath reclaimd
To your obedience fifty fortresses,
Twelve cities and seven walled towns of strength,
Beside five hundred prisoners of esteem,
Lets fall his sword before your highness feet,
And with submissive loyalty of heart
Ascribes the glory of his conquest got
First to my God and next unto your grace.
Kneels
Is this the Lord Talbot, uncle Gloucester,
That hath so long been resident in France?
Yes, if it please your majesty, my liege.
Welcome, brave captain and victorious lord!
When I was young, as yet I am not old,
I do remember how my father said
A stouter champion never handled sword.
Long since we were resolved of your truth,
Your faithful service and your toil in war;
Yet never have you tasted our reward,
Or been reguerdond with so much as thanks,
Because till now we never saw your face:
Therefore, stand up; and, for these good deserts,
We here create you Earl of Shrewsbury;
And in our coronation take your place.
Sennet. Flourish. Exeunt all but VERNON and BASSET
Now, sir, to you, that were so hot at sea,
Disgracing of these colours that I wear
In honour of my noble Lord of York:
Darest thou maintain the former words thou spakest?
Yes, sir; as well as you dare patronage
The envious barking of your saucy tongue
Against my lord the Duke of Somerset.
Sirrah, thy lord I honour as he is.
Why, what is he? as good a man as York.
Hark ye; not so: in witness, take ye that.
Strikes him
Villain, thou knowst the law of arms is such
That whoso draws a sword, tis present death,
Or else this blow should broach thy dearest blood.
But Ill unto his majesty, and crave
I may have liberty to venge this wrong;
When thou shalt see Ill meet thee to thy cost.
Well, miscreant, Ill be there as soon as you;
And, after, meet you sooner than you would.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Paris. A hall of state.
Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, BISHOP OF  WINCHESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, SOMERSET, WARWICK, TALBOT, EXETER, the Governor, of Paris, and others
Lord bishop, set the crown upon his head.
BISHOP
God save King Henry, of that name the sixth!
Now, governor of Paris, take your oath,
That you elect no other king but him;
Esteem none friends but such as are his friends,
And none your foes but such as shall pretend
Malicious practises against his state:
This shall ye do, so help you righteous God!
Enter FASTOLFE
My gracious sovereign, as I rode from Calais,
To haste unto your coronation,
A letter was deliverd to my hands,
Writ to your grace from the Duke of Burgundy.
Shame to the Duke of Burgundy and thee!
I vowd, base knight, when I did meet thee next,
To tear the garter from thy cravens leg,
Plucking it off
Which I have done, because unworthily
Thou wast installed in that high degree.
Pardon me, princely Henry, and the rest
This dastard, at the battle of Patay,
When but in all I was six thousand strong
