And that the French were almost ten to one,
Before we met or that a stroke was given,
Like to a trusty squire did run away:
In which assault we lost twelve hundred men;
Myself and divers gentlemen beside
Were there surprised and taken prisoners.
Then judge, great lords, if I have done amiss;
Or whether that such cowards ought to wear
This ornament of knighthood, yea or no.
To say the truth, this fact was infamous
And ill beseeming any common man,
Much more a knight, a captain and a leader.
When first this order was ordaind, my lords,
Knights of the garter were of noble birth,
Valiant and virtuous, full of haughty courage,
Such as were grown to credit by the wars;
Not fearing death, nor shrinking for distress,
But always resolute in most extremes.
He then that is not furnishd in this sort
Doth but usurp the sacred name of knight,
Profaning this most honourable order,
And should, if I were worthy to be judge,
Be quite degraded, like a hedge-born swain
That doth presume to boast of gentle blood.
Stain to thy countrymen, thou hearst thy doom!
Be packing, therefore, thou that wast a knight:
Henceforth we banish thee, on pain of death.
Exit FASTOLFE
And now, my lord protector, view the letter
Sent from our uncle Duke of Burgundy.
What means his grace, that he hath changed his style?
No more but, plain and bluntly, To the king!
Hath he forgot he is his sovereign?
Or doth this churlish superscription
Pretend some alteration in good will?
Whats here?
Reads
I have, upon especial cause,
Moved with compassion of my countrys wreck,
Together with the pitiful complaints
Of such as your oppression feeds upon,
Forsaken your pernicious faction
And joind with Charles, the rightful King of France.
O monstrous treachery! can this be so,
That in alliance, amity and oaths,
There should be found such false dissembling guile?
What! doth my uncle Burgundy revolt?
He doth, my lord, and is become your foe.
Is that the worst this letter doth contain?
It is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.
Why, then, Lord Talbot there shall talk with him
And give him chastisement for this abuse.
How say you, my lord? are you not content?
Content, my liege! yes, but that I am prevented,
I should have beggd I might have been employd.
Then gather strength and march unto him straight:
Let him perceive how ill we brook his treason
And what offence it is to flout his friends.
I go, my lord, in heart desiring still
You may behold confusion of your foes.
Exit
Enter VERNON and BASSET
Grant me the combat, gracious sovereign.
And me, my lord, grant me the combat too.
This is my servant: hear him, noble prince.
And this is mine: sweet Henry, favour him.
Be patient, lords; and give them leave to speak.
Say, gentlemen, what makes you thus exclaim?
And wherefore crave you combat? or with whom?
With him, my lord; for he hath done me wrong.
And I with him; for he hath done me wrong.
What is that wrong whereof you both complain?
First let me know, and then Ill answer you.
Crossing the sea from England into France,
This fellow here, with envious carping tongue,
Upbraided me about the rose I wear;
Saying, the sanguine colour of the leaves
Did represent my masters blushing cheeks,
When stubbornly he did repugn the truth
About a certain question in the law
Argued betwixt the Duke of York and him;
With other vile and ignominious terms:
In confutation of which rude reproach
And in defence of my lords worthiness,
I crave the benefit of law of arms.
And that is my petition, noble lord:
For though he seem with forged quaint conceit
To set a gloss upon his bold intent,
Yet know, my lord, I was provoked by him;
And he first took exceptions at this badge,
Pronouncing that the paleness of this flower
Bewrayd the faintness of my masters heart.
Will not this malice, Somerset, be left?
Your private grudge, my Lord of York, will out,
Though neer so cunningly you smother it.
Good Lord, what madness rules in brainsick men,
When for so slight and frivolous a cause
Such factious emulations shall arise!
Good cousins both, of York and Somerset,
Quiet yourselves, I pray, and be at peace.
Let this dissension first be tried by fight,
And then your highness shall command a peace.
The quarrel toucheth none but us alone;
Betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.
There is my pledge; accept it, Somerset.
Nay, let it rest where it began at first.
Confirm it so, mine honourable lord.
Confirm it so! Confounded be your strife!
And perish ye, with your audacious prate!
Presumptuous vassals, are you not ashamed
With this immodest clamorous outrage
To trouble and disturb the king and us?
And you, my lords, methinks you do not well
To bear with their perverse objections;
Much less to take occasion from their mouths
To raise a mutiny betwixt yourselves:
Let me persuade you take a better course.
It grieves his highness: good my lords, be friends.
Come hither, you that would be combatants:
Henceforth I charge you, as you love our favour,
Quite to forget this quarrel and the cause.
And you, my lords, remember where we are,
In France, amongst a fickle wavering nation:
If they perceive dissension in our looks
And that within ourselves we disagree,
How will their grudging stomachs be provoked
To wilful disobedience, and rebel!
Beside, what infamy will there arise,
When foreign princes shall be certified
That for a toy, a thing of no regard,
King Henrys peers and chief nobility
Destroyd themselves, and lost the realm of France!
O, think upon the conquest of my father,
My tender years, and let us not forego
That for a trifle that was bought with blood
Let me be umpire in this doubtful strife.
I see no reason, if I wear this rose,
Putting on a red rose
That any one should therefore be suspicious
I more incline to Somerset than York:
Both are my kinsmen, and I love them both:
As well they may upbraid me with my crown,
Because, forsooth, the king of Scots is crownd.
But your discretions better can persuade
Than I am able to instruct or teach:
And therefore, as we hither came in peace,
So let us still continue peace and love.
Cousin of York, we institute your grace
To be our regent in these parts of France:
And, good my Lord of Somerset, unite
Your troops of horsemen with his bands of foot;
And, like true subjects, sons of your progenitors,
Go cheerfully together and digest.
Your angry choler on your enemies.
Ourself, my lord protector and the rest
After some respite will return to Calais;
From thence to England; where I hope ere long
To be presented, by your victories,
With Charles, Alencon and that traitorous rout.
Flourish. Exeunt all but YORK, WARWICK, EXETER and VERNON
My Lord of York, I promise you, the king
Prettily, methought, did play the orator.
And so he did; but yet I like it not,
In that he wears the badge of Somerset.
Tush, that was but his fancy, blame him not;
I dare presume, sweet prince, he thought no harm.
An if I wist he did,--but let it rest;
Other affairs must now be managed.
Exeunt all but EXETER
Well didst thou, Richard, to suppress thy voice;
For, had the passions of thy heart burst out,
I fear we should have seen decipherd there
More rancorous spite, more furious raging broils,
Than yet can be imagined or supposed.
But howsoeer, no simple man that sees
This jarring discord of nobility,
This shouldering of each other in the court,
This factious bandying of their favourites,
But that it doth presage some ill event.
Tis much when sceptres are in childrens hands;
But more when envy breeds unkind division;
There comes the rain, there begins confusion.
Exit
SCENE II. Before Bourdeaux.
Enter TALBOT, with trump and drum
Go to the gates of Bourdeaux, trumpeter:
Summon their general unto the wall.
Trumpet sounds. Enter General and others, aloft
English John Talbot, captains, calls you forth,
Servant in arms to Harry King of England;
And thus he would: Open your city gates;
Be humble to us; call my sovereign yours,
And do him homage as obedient subjects;
And Ill withdraw me and my bloody power:
But, if you frown upon this profferd peace,
You tempt the fury of my three attendants,
Lean famine, quartering steel, and climbing fire;
Who in a moment even with the earth
Shall lay your stately and air-braving towers,
If you forsake the offer of their love.
Thou ominous and fearful owl of death,
Our nations terror and their bloody scourge!
The period of thy tyranny approacheth.
On us thou canst not enter but by death;
For, I protest, we are well fortified
And strong enough to issue out and fight:
If thou retire, the Dauphin, well appointed,
Stands with the snares of war to tangle thee:
On either hand thee there are squadrons pitchd,
To wall thee from the liberty of flight;
And no way canst thou turn thee for redress,
But death doth front thee with apparent spoil
And pale destruction meets thee in the face.
Ten thousand French have taen the sacrament
To rive their dangerous artillery
Upon no Christian soul but English Talbot.
Lo, there thou standst, a breathing valiant man,
Of an invincible unconquerd spirit!
This is the latest glory of thy praise
That I, thy enemy, due thee withal;
For ere the glass, that now begins to run,
Finish the process of his sandy hour,
These eyes, that see thee now well coloured,
Shall see thee witherd, bloody, pale and dead.
Drum afar off
Hark! hark! the Dauphins drum, a warning bell,
Sings heavy music to thy timorous soul;
And mine shall ring thy dire departure out.
Exeunt General,  and c
He fables not; I hear the enemy:
Out, some light horsemen, and peruse their wings.
O, negligent and heedless discipline!
How are we parkd and bounded in a pale,
A little herd of Englands timorous deer,
Mazed with a yelping kennel of French curs!
If we be English deer, be then in blood;
Not rascal-like, to fall down with a pinch,
But rather, moody-mad and desperate stags,
Turn on the bloody hounds with heads of steel
And make the cowards stand aloof at bay:
Sell every man his life as dear as mine,
And they shall find dear deer of us, my friends.
God and Saint George, Talbot and Englands right,
Prosper our colours in this dangerous fight!
Exeunt
SCENE III. Plains in Gascony.
Enter a Messenger that meets YORK. Enter YORK with trumpet and many Soldiers
Are not the speedy scouts returnd again,
That doggd the mighty army of the Dauphin?
They are returnd, my lord, and give it out
That he is marchd to Bourdeaux with his power,
To fight with Talbot: as he marchd along,
By your espials were discovered
Two mightier troops than that the Dauphin led,
Which joind with him and made their march for Bourdeaux.
A plague upon that villain Somerset,
That thus delays my promised supply
Of horsemen, that were levied for this siege!
Renowned Talbot doth expect my aid,
And I am lowted by a traitor villain
And cannot help the noble chevalier:
God comfort him in this necessity!
If he miscarry, farewell wars in France.
Enter Sir William LUCY
Thou princely leader of our English strength,
Never so needful on the earth of France,
Spur to the rescue of the noble Talbot,
Who now is girdled with a waist of iron
And hemmd about with grim destruction:
To Bourdeaux, warlike duke! to Bourdeaux, York!
Else, farewell Talbot, France, and Englands honour.
O God, that Somerset, who in proud heart
Doth stop my cornets, were in Talbots place!
So should we save a valiant gentleman
By forfeiting a traitor and a coward.
Mad ire and wrathful fury makes me weep,
That thus we die, while remiss traitors sleep.
O, send some succor to the distressd lord!
He dies, we lose; I break my warlike word;
We mourn, France smiles; we lose, they daily get;
All long of this vile traitor Somerset.
Then God take mercy on brave Talbots soul;
And on his son young John, who two hours since
I met in travel toward his warlike father!
This seven years did not Talbot see his son;
And now they meet where both their lives are done.
Alas, what joy shall noble Talbot have
To bid his young son welcome to his grave?
Away! vexation almost stops my breath,
That sunderd friends greet in the hour of death.
Lucy, farewell; no more my fortune can,
But curse the cause I cannot aid the man.
Maine, Blois, Poictiers, and Tours, are won away,
Long all of Somerset and his delay.
Exit, with his soldiers
Thus, while the vulture of sedition
Feeds in the bosom of such great commanders,
Sleeping neglection doth betray to loss
The conquest of our scarce cold conqueror,
That ever living man of memory,
Henry the Fifth: whiles they each other cross,
Lives, honours, lands and all hurry to loss.
Exit
SCENE IV. Other plains in Gascony.
Enter SOMERSET, with his army; a Captain of TALBOTs with him
It is too late; I cannot send them now:
This expedition was by York and Talbot
Too rashly plotted: all our general force
Might with a sally of the very town
Be buckled with: the over-daring Talbot
Hath sullied all his gloss of former honour
By this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure:
York set him on to fight and die in shame,
That, Talbot dead, great York might bear the name.
Here is Sir William Lucy, who with me
Set from our oermatchd forces forth for aid.
Enter Sir William LUCY
How now, Sir William! whither were you sent?
Whither, my lord? from bought and sold Lord Talbot;
Who, ringd about with bold adversity,
Cries out for noble York and Somerset,
To beat assailing death from his weak legions:
And whiles the honourable captain there
Drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs,
And, in advantage lingering, looks for rescue,
You, his false hopes, the trust of Englands honour,
Keep off aloof with worthless emulation.
Let not your private discord keep away
The levied succors that should lend him aid,
While he, renowned noble gentleman,
Yields up his life unto a world of odds:
Orleans the Bastard, Charles, Burgundy,
Alencon, Reignier, compass him about,
And Talbot perisheth by your default.
York set him on; York should have sent him aid.
And York as fast upon your grace exclaims;
Swearing that you withhold his levied host,
Collected for this expedition.
York lies; he might have sent and had the horse;
I owe him little duty, and less love;
And take foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.
The fraud of England, not the force of France,
Hath now entrappd the noble-minded Talbot:
Never to England shall he bear his life;
But dies, betrayd to fortune by your strife.
Come, go; I will dispatch the horsemen straight:
Within six hours they will be at his aid.
Too late comes rescue: he is taen or slain;
For fly he could not, if he would have fled;
And fly would Talbot never, though he might.
If he be dead, brave Talbot, then adieu!
His fame lives in the world, his shame in you.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The English camp near Bourdeaux.
Enter TALBOT and JOHN his son
O young John Talbot! I did send for thee
To tutor thee in stratagems of war,
That Talbots name might be in thee revived
When sapless age and weak unable limbs
Should bring thy father to his drooping chair.
But, O malignant and ill-boding stars!
Now thou art come unto a feast of death,
A terrible and unavoided danger:
Therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse;
And Ill direct thee how thou shalt escape
By sudden flight: come, dally not, be gone.
Is my name Talbot? and am I your son?
And shall I fly? O if you love my mother,
Dishonour not her honourable name,
To make a bastard and a slave of me!
The world will say, he is not Talbots blood,
That basely fled when noble Talbot stood.
Fly, to revenge my death, if I be slain.
He that flies so will neer return again.
If we both stay, we both are sure to die.
Then let me stay; and, father, do you fly:
Your loss is great, so your regard should be;
My worth unknown, no loss is known in me.
Upon my death the French can little boast;
In yours they will, in you all hopes are lost.
Flight cannot stain the honour you have won;
But mine it will, that no exploit have done:
You fled for vantage, everyone will swear;
But, if I bow, theyll say it was for fear.
There is no hope that ever I will stay,
If the first hour I shrink and run away.
Here on my knee I beg mortality,
Rather than life preserved with infamy.
Shall all thy mothers hopes lie in one tomb?
Ay, rather than Ill shame my mothers womb.
Upon my blessing, I command thee go.
To fight I will, but not to fly the foe.
Part of thy father may be saved in thee.
No part of him but will be shame in me.
Thou never hadst renown, nor canst not lose it.
Yes, your renowned name: shall flight abuse it?
Thy fathers charge shall clear thee from that stain.
You cannot witness for me, being slain.
If death be so apparent, then both fly.
And leave my followers here to fight and die?
My age was never tainted with such shame.
And shall my youth be guilty of such blame?
No more can I be severd from your side,
Than can yourself yourself in twain divide:
Stay, go, do what you will, the like do I;
For live I will not, if my father die.
Then here I take my leave of thee, fair son,
Born to eclipse thy life this afternoon.
Come, side by side together live and die.
And soul with soul from France to heaven fly.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. A field of battle.
Alarum: excursions, wherein JOHN TALBOT is hemmed about, and TALBOT rescues him
Saint George and victory! fight, soldiers, fight.
The regent hath with Talbot broke his word
And left us to the rage of France his sword.
Where is John Talbot? Pause, and take thy breath;
I gave thee life and rescued thee from death.
O, twice my father, twice am I thy son!
The life thou gavest me first was lost and done,
Till with thy warlike sword, despite of late,
To my determined time thou gavest new date.
When from the Dauphins crest thy sword struck fire,
It warmd thy fathers heart with proud desire
Of bold-faced victory. Then leaden age,
Quickend with youthful spleen and warlike rage,
Beat down Alencon, Orleans, Burgundy,
And from the pride of Gallia rescued thee.
The ireful bastard Orleans, that drew blood
From thee, my boy, and had the maidenhood
Of thy first fight, I soon encountered,
And interchanging blows I quickly shed
Some of his bastard blood; and in disgrace
Bespoke him thus; Contaminated, base
And misbegotten blood I spill of thine,
Mean and right poor, for that pure blood of mine
Which thou didst force from Talbot, my brave boy:
Here, purposing the Bastard to destroy,
Came in strong rescue. Speak, thy fathers care,
Art thou not weary, John? how dost thou fare?
Wilt thou yet leave the battle, boy, and fly,
Now thou art seald the son of chivalry?
Fly, to revenge my death when I am dead:
The help of one stands me in little stead.
O, too much folly is it, well I wot,
To hazard all our lives in one small boat!
If I to-day die not with Frenchmens rage,
To-morrow I shall die with mickle age:
By me they nothing gain an if I stay;
Tis but the shortening of my life one day:
In thee thy mother dies, our households name,
My deaths revenge, thy youth, and Englands fame:
All these and more we hazard by thy stay;
All these are saved if thou wilt fly away.
The sword of Orleans hath not made me smart;
These words of yours draw life-blood from my heart:
On that advantage, bought with such a shame,
To save a paltry life and slay bright fame,
Before young Talbot from old Talbot fly,
The coward horse that bears me fail and die!
And like me to the peasant boys of France,
To be shames scorn and subject of mischance!
Surely, by all the glory you have won,
An if I fly, I am not Talbots son:
Then talk no more of flight, it is no boot;
If son to Talbot, die at Talbots foot.
Then follow thou thy desperate sire of Crete,
Thou Icarus; thy life to me is sweet:
If thou wilt fight, fight by thy fathers side;
And, commendable proved, lets die in pride.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Another part of the field.
Alarum: excursions. Enter TALBOT led by a Servant
Where is my other life? mine own is gone;
O, wheres young Talbot? where is valiant John?
Triumphant death, smeard with captivity,
Young Talbots valour makes me smile at thee:
When he perceived me shrink and on my knee,
His bloody sword he brandishd over me,
And, like a hungry lion, did commence
Rough deeds of rage and stern impatience;
But when my angry guardant stood alone,
Tendering my ruin and assaild of none,
Dizzy-eyed fury and great rage of heart
Suddenly made him from my side to start
Into the clustering battle of the French;
And in that sea of blood my boy did drench
His over-mounting spirit, and there died,
My Icarus, my blossom, in his pride.
O, my dear lord, lo, where your son is borne!
Enter Soldiers, with the body of JOHN TALBOT
Thou antic death, which laughst us here to scorn,
Anon, from thy insulting tyranny,
Coupled in bonds of perpetuity,
Two Talbots, winged through the lither sky,
In thy despite shall scape mortality.
O, thou, whose wounds become hard-favourd death,
Speak to thy father ere thou yield thy breath!
Brave death by speaking, whether he will or no;
Imagine him a Frenchman and thy foe.
Poor boy! he smiles, methinks, as who should say,
Had death been French, then death had died to-day.
Come, come and lay him in his fathers arms:
My spirit can no longer bear these harms.
Soldiers, adieu! I have what I would have,
Now my old arms are young John Talbots grave.
Dies
Enter CHARLES, ALENCON, BURGUNDY, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forces
Had York and Somerset brought rescue in,
We should have found a bloody day of this.
How the young whelp of Talbots, raging-wood,
Did flesh his puny sword in Frenchmens blood!
Once I encounterd him, and thus I said:
Thou maiden youth, be vanquishd by a maid:
But, with a proud majestical high scorn,
He answerd thus: Young Talbot was not born
To be the pillage of a giglot wench:
So, rushing in the bowels of the French,
He left me proudly, as unworthy fight.
Doubtless he would have made a noble knight;
See, where he lies inhearsed in the arms
Of the most bloody nurser of his harms!
Hew them to pieces, hack their bones asunder
Whose life was Englands glory, Gallias wonder.
O, no, forbear! for that which we have fled
During the life, let us not wrong it dead.
Enter Sir William LUCY, attended; Herald of the French preceding
Herald, conduct me to the Dauphins tent,
To know who hath obtained the glory of the day.
On what submissive message art thou sent?
Submission, Dauphin! tis a mere French word;
We English warriors wot not what it means.
I come to know what prisoners thou hast taen
And to survey the bodies of the dead.
For prisoners askst thou? hell our prison is.
But tell me whom thou seekst.
But wheres the great Alcides of the field,
Valiant Lord Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury,
Created, for his rare success in arms,
Great Earl of Washford, Waterford and Valence;
Lord Talbot of Goodrig and Urchinfield,
Lord Strange of Blackmere, Lord Verdun of Alton,
Lord Cromwell of Wingfield, Lord Furnival of Sheffield,
The thrice-victorious Lord of Falconbridge;
Knight of the noble order of Saint George,
Worthy Saint Michael and the Golden Fleece;
Great marshal to Henry the Sixth
Of all his wars within the realm of France?
Here is a silly stately style indeed!
The Turk, that two and fifty kingdoms hath,
Writes not so tedious a style as this.
Him that thou magnifiest with all these titles
Stinking and fly-blown lies here at our feet.
Is Talbot slain, the Frenchmens only scourge,
Your kingdoms terror and black Nemesis?
O, were mine eyeballs into bullets turnd,
That I in rage might shoot them at your faces!
O, that I could but call these dead to life!
It were enough to fright the realm of France:
Were but his picture left amongst you here,
It would amaze the proudest of you all.
Give me their bodies, that I may bear them hence
And give them burial as beseems their worth.
I think this upstart is old Talbots ghost,
He speaks with such a proud commanding spirit.
For Gods sake let him have em; to keep them here,
They would but stink, and putrefy the air.
Go, take their bodies hence.
Ill bear them hence; but from their ashes shall be reard
A phoenix that shall make all France afeard.
So we be rid of them, do with em what thou wilt.
And now to Paris, in this conquering vein:
All will be ours, now bloody Talbots slain.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, GLOUCESTER, and EXETER
Have you perused the letters from the pope,
The emperor and the Earl of Armagnac?
I have, my lord: and their intent is this:
They humbly sue unto your excellence
To have a godly peace concluded of
Between the realms of England and of France.
How doth your grace affect their motion?
Well, my good lord; and as the only means
To stop effusion of our Christian blood
And stablish quietness on every side.
Ay, marry, uncle; for I always thought
It was both impious and unnatural
That such immanity and bloody strife
Should reign among professors of one faith.
Beside, my lord, the sooner to effect
And surer bind this knot of amity,
The Earl of Armagnac, near knit to Charles,
A man of great authority in France,
Proffers his only daughter to your grace
In marriage, with a large and sumptuous dowry.
Marriage, uncle! alas, my years are young!
And fitter is my study and my books
Than wanton dalliance with a paramour.
Yet call the ambassador; and, as you please,
So let them have their answers every one:
I shall be well content with any choice
Tends to Gods glory and my countrys weal.
Enter CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER in Cardinals habit, a Legate and two Ambassadors
What! is my Lord of Winchester installd,
And calld unto a cardinals degree?
Then I perceive that will be verified
Henry the Fifth did sometime prophesy,
If once he come to be a cardinal,
Hell make his cap co-equal with the crown.
My lords ambassadors, your several suits
Have been considerd and debated on.
And therefore are we certainly resolved
To draw conditions of a friendly peace;
Which by my Lord of Winchester we mean
Shall be transported presently to France.
And for the proffer of my lord your master,
I have informd his highness so at large
As liking of the ladys virtuous gifts,
Her beauty and the value of her dower,
He doth intend she shall be Englands queen.
In argument and proof of which contract,
Bear her this jewel, pledge of my affection.
And so, my lord protector, see them guarded
And safely brought to Dover; where inshippd
Commit them to the fortune of the sea.
Exeunt all but CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER and Legate
CARDINAL
Stay, my lord legate: you shall first receive
The sum of money which I promised
Should be deliverd to his holiness
For clothing me in these grave ornaments.
I will attend upon your lordships leisure.
CARDINAL
[Aside]  Now Winchester will not submit, I trow,
Or be inferior to the proudest peer.
Humphrey of Gloucester, thou shalt well perceive
That, neither in birth or for authority,
The bishop will be overborne by thee:
Ill either make thee stoop and bend thy knee,
Or sack this country with a mutiny.
Exeunt
SCENE II. France. Plains in Anjou.
Enter CHARLES, BURGUNDY, ALENCON, BASTARD OF ORLEANS, REIGNIER, JOAN LA PUCELLE, and forces
These news, my lord, may cheer our drooping spirits:
Tis said the stout Parisians do revolt
And turn again unto the warlike French.
Then march to Paris, royal Charles of France,
And keep not back your powers in dalliance.
Peace be amongst them, if they turn to us;
Else, ruin combat with their palaces!
Enter Scout
Success unto our valiant general,
And happiness to his accomplices!
What tidings send our scouts? I prithee, speak.
The English army, that divided was
Into two parties, is now conjoined in one,
And means to give you battle presently.
Somewhat too sudden, sirs, the warning is;
But we will presently provide for them.
I trust the ghost of Talbot is not there:
Now he is gone, my lord, you need not fear.
Of all base passions, fear is most accursed.
Command the conquest, Charles, it shall be thine,
Let Henry fret and all the world repine.
Then on, my lords; and France be fortunate!
Exeunt
SCENE III. Before Angiers.
Alarum. Excursions. Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE
The regent conquers, and the Frenchmen fly.
Now help, ye charming spells and periapts;
And ye choice spirits that admonish me
And give me signs of future accidents.
Thunder
You speedy helpers, that are substitutes
Under the lordly monarch of the north,
Appear and aid me in this enterprise.
Enter Fiends
This speedy and quick appearance argues proof
Of your accustomd diligence to me.
Now, ye familiar spirits, that are culld
Out of the powerful regions under earth,
Help me this once, that France may get the field.
They walk, and speak not
O, hold me not with silence over-long!
Where I was wont to feed you with my blood,
Ill lop a member off and give it you
In earnest of further benefit,
So you do condescend to help me now.
They hang their heads
No hope to have redress? My body shall
Pay recompense, if you will grant my suit.
They shake their heads
Cannot my body nor blood-sacrifice
Entreat you to your wonted furtherance?
Then take my soul, my body, soul and all,
Before that England give the French the foil.
They depart
See, they forsake me! Now the time is come
That France must vail her lofty-plumed crest
And let her head fall into Englands lap.
My ancient incantations are too weak,
And hell too strong for me to buckle with:
Now, France, thy glory droopeth to the dust.
Exit
Excursions. Re-enter JOAN LA PUCELLE fighting hand  to hand with YORK. JOAN LA PUCELLE is taken. The French fly.
Damsel of France, I think I have you fast:
Unchain your spirits now with spelling charms
And try if they can gain your liberty.
A goodly prize, fit for the devils grace!
See, how the ugly wench doth bend her brows,
As if with Circe she would change my shape!
Changed to a worser shape thou canst not be.
O, Charles the Dauphin is a proper man;
No shape but his can please your dainty eye.
A plaguing mischief light on Charles and thee!
And may ye both be suddenly surprised
By bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds!
Fell banning hag, enchantress, hold thy tongue!
I prithee, give me leave to curse awhile.
Curse, miscreant, when thou comest to the stake.
Exeunt
Alarum. Enter SUFFOLK with MARGARET in his hand
Be what thou wilt, thou art my prisoner.
Gazes on her
O fairest beauty, do not fear nor fly!
For I will touch thee but with reverent hands;
I kiss these fingers for eternal peace,
And lay them gently on thy tender side.
Who art thou? say, that I may honour thee.
Margaret my name, and daughter to a king,
The King of Naples, whosoeer thou art.
An earl I am, and Suffolk am I calld.
Be not offended, natures miracle,
Thou art allotted to be taen by me:
So doth the swan her downy cygnets save,
Keeping them prisoner underneath her wings.
Yet, if this servile usage once offend.
Go, and be free again, as Suffolks friend.
She is going
O, stay! I have no power to let her pass;
My hand would free her, but my heart says no
As plays the sun upon the glassy streams,
Twinkling another counterfeited beam,
So seems this gorgeous beauty to mine eyes.
Fain would I woo her, yet I dare not speak:
Ill call for pen and ink, and write my mind.
Fie, de la Pole! disable not thyself;
Hast not a tongue? is she not here?
Wilt thou be daunted at a womans sight?
Ay, beautys princely majesty is such,
Confounds the tongue and makes the senses rough.
Say, Earl of Suffolk--if thy name be so--
What ransom must I pay before I pass?
For I perceive I am thy prisoner.
How canst thou tell she will deny thy suit,
Before thou make a trial of her love?
Why speakst thou not? what ransom must I pay?
Shes beautiful, and therefore to be wood;
She is a woman, therefore to be won.
Wilt thou accept of ransom? yea, or no.
Fond man, remember that thou hast a wife;
Then how can Margaret be thy paramour?
I were best to leave him, for he will not hear.
There all is marrd; there lies a cooling card.
He talks at random; sure, the man is mad.
And yet a dispensation may be had.
And yet I would that you would answer me.
Ill win this Lady Margaret. For whom?
Why, for my king: tush, thats a wooden thing!
He talks of wood: it is some carpenter.
Yet so my fancy may be satisfied,
And peace established between these realms
But there remains a scruple in that too;
For though her father be the King of Naples,
Duke of Anjou and Maine, yet is he poor,
And our nobility will scorn the match.
Hear ye, captain, are you not at leisure?
It shall be so, disdain they neer so much.
Henry is youthful and will quickly yield.
Madam, I have a secret to reveal.
What though I be enthralld? he seems a knight,
And will not any way dishonour me.
Lady, vouchsafe to listen what I say.
Perhaps I shall be rescued by the French;
And then I need not crave his courtesy.
Sweet madam, give me a hearing in a cause--
Tush, women have been captivate ere now.
Lady, wherefore talk you so?
I cry you mercy, tis but Quid for Quo.
Say, gentle princess, would you not suppose
Your bondage happy, to be made a queen?
To be a queen in bondage is more vile
Than is a slave in base servility;
For princes should be free.
And so shall you,
If happy Englands royal king be free.
Why, what concerns his freedom unto me?
Ill undertake to make thee Henrys queen,
To put a golden sceptre in thy hand
And set a precious crown upon thy head,
If thou wilt condescend to be my--
What?
His love.
I am unworthy to be Henrys wife.
No, gentle madam; I unworthy am
To woo so fair a dame to be his wife,
And have no portion in the choice myself.
How say you, madam, are ye so content?
An if my father please, I am content.
Then call our captains and our colours forth.
And, madam, at your fathers castle walls
Well crave a parley, to confer with him.
A parley sounded. Enter REIGNIER on the walls
See, Reignier, see, thy daughter prisoner!
To whom?
To me.
Suffolk, what remedy?
I am a soldier, and unapt to weep,
Or to exclaim on fortunes fickleness.
Yes, there is remedy enough, my lord:
Consent, and for thy honour give consent,
Thy daughter shall be wedded to my king;
Whom I with pain have wood and won thereto;
And this her easy-held imprisonment
Hath gained thy daughter princely liberty.
Speaks Suffolk as he thinks?
Fair Margaret knows
That Suffolk doth not flatter, face, or feign.
Upon thy princely warrant, I descend
To give thee answer of thy just demand.
Exit from the walls
And here I will expect thy coming.
Trumpets sound. Enter REIGNIER, below
Welcome, brave earl, into our territories:
Command in Anjou what your honour pleases.
Thanks, Reignier, happy for so sweet a child,
Fit to be made companion with a king:
What answer makes your grace unto my suit?
Since thou dost deign to woo her little worth
To be the princely bride of such a lord;
Upon condition I may quietly
Enjoy mine own, the country Maine and Anjou,
Free from oppression or the stroke of war,
My daughter shall be Henrys, if he please.
That is her ransom; I deliver her;
And those two counties I will undertake
Your grace shall well and quietly enjoy.
And I again, in Henrys royal name,
As deputy unto that gracious king,
Give thee her hand, for sign of plighted faith.
Reignier of France, I give thee kingly thanks,
Because this is in traffic of a king.
Aside
And yet, methinks, I could be well content
To be mine own attorney in this case.
Ill over then to England with this news,
And make this marriage to be solemnized.
So farewell, Reignier: set this diamond safe
In golden palaces, as it becomes.
I do embrace thee, as I would embrace
The Christian prince, King Henry, were he here.
Farewell, my lord: good wishes, praise and prayers
Shall Suffolk ever have of Margaret.
Going
Farewell, sweet madam: but hark you, Margaret;
No princely commendations to my king?
Such commendations as becomes a maid,
A virgin and his servant, say to him.
Words sweetly placed and modestly directed.
But madam, I must trouble you again;
No loving token to his majesty?
Yes, my good lord, a pure unspotted heart,
Never yet taint with love, I send the king.
And this withal.
Kisses her
That for thyself: I will not so presume
To send such peevish tokens to a king.
Exeunt REIGNIER and MARGARET
O, wert thou for myself! But, Suffolk, stay;
Thou mayst not wander in that labyrinth;
There Minotaurs and ugly treasons lurk.
Solicit Henry with her wondrous praise:
Bethink thee on her virtues that surmount,
And natural graces that extinguish art;
Repeat their semblance often on the seas,
That, when thou comest to kneel at Henrys feet,
Thou mayst bereave him of his wits with wonder.
Exit
SCENE IV. Camp of the YORK in Anjou.
Enter YORK, WARWICK, and others
Bring forth that sorceress condemnd to burn.
Enter JOAN LA PUCELLE, guarded, and a Shepherd
Ah, Joan, this kills thy fathers heart outright!
Have I sought every country far and near,
And, now it is my chance to find thee out,
Must I behold thy timeless cruel death?
Ah, Joan, sweet daughter Joan, Ill die with thee!
Decrepit miser! base ignoble wretch!
I am descended of a gentler blood:
Thou art no father nor no friend of mine.
Out, out! My lords, an please you, tis not so;
I did beget her, all the parish knows:
Her mother liveth yet, can testify
She was the first fruit of my bachelorship.
Graceless! wilt thou deny thy parentage?
This argues what her kind of life hath been,
Wicked and vile; and so her death concludes.
Fie, Joan, that thou wilt be so obstacle!
God knows thou art a collop of my flesh;
And for thy sake have I shed many a tear:
Deny me not, I prithee, gentle Joan.
Peasant, avaunt! You have subornd this man,
Of purpose to obscure my noble birth.
Tis true, I gave a noble to the priest
The morn that I was wedded to her mother.
Kneel down and take my blessing, good my girl.
Wilt thou not stoop? Now cursed be the time
Of thy nativity! I would the milk
Thy mother gave thee when thou suckdst her breast,
Had been a little ratsbane for thy sake!
Or else, when thou didst keep my lambs a-field,
I wish some ravenous wolf had eaten thee!
Dost thou deny thy father, cursed drab?
O, burn her, burn her! hanging is too good.
Exit
Take her away; for she hath lived too long,
To fill the world with vicious qualities.
First, let me tell you whom you have condemnd:
Not me begotten of a shepherd swain,
But issued from the progeny of kings;
Virtuous and holy; chosen from above,
By inspiration of celestial grace,
To work exceeding miracles on earth.
I never had to do with wicked spirits:
But you, that are polluted with your lusts,
Staind with the guiltless blood of innocents,
Corrupt and tainted with a thousand vices,
Because you want the grace that others have,
You judge it straight a thing impossible
To compass wonders but by help of devils.
No, misconceived! Joan of Arc hath been
A virgin from her tender infancy,
Chaste and immaculate in very thought;
Whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused,
Will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.
Ay, ay: away with her to execution!
And hark ye, sirs; because she is a maid,
Spare for no faggots, let there be enow:
Place barrels of pitch upon the fatal stake,
That so her torture may be shortened.
Will nothing turn your unrelenting hearts?
Then, Joan, discover thine infirmity,
That warranteth by law to be thy privilege.
I am with child, ye bloody homicides:
Murder not then the fruit within my womb,
Although ye hale me to a violent death.
Now heaven forfend! the holy maid with child!
The greatest miracle that eer ye wrought:
Is all your strict preciseness come to this?
She and the Dauphin have been juggling:
I did imagine what would be her refuge.
Well, go to; well have no bastards live;
Especially since Charles must father it.
You are deceived; my child is none of his:
It was Alencon that enjoyd my love.
Alencon! that notorious Machiavel!
It dies, an if it had a thousand lives.
O, give me leave, I have deluded you:
Twas neither Charles nor yet the duke I named,
But Reignier, king of Naples, that prevaild.
A married man! thats most intolerable.
Why, heres a girl! I think she knows not well,
There were so many, whom she may accuse.
Its sign she hath been liberal and free.
And yet, forsooth, she is a virgin pure.
Strumpet, thy words condemn thy brat and thee:
Use no entreaty, for it is in vain.
Then lead me hence; with whom I leave my curse:
May never glorious sun reflex his beams
Upon the country where you make abode;
But darkness and the gloomy shade of death
Environ you, till mischief and despair
Drive you to break your necks or hang yourselves!
Exit, guarded
Break thou in pieces and consume to ashes,
Thou foul accursed minister of hell!
Enter CARDINAL OF WINCHESTER, attended
CARDINAL
Lord regent, I do greet your excellence
With letters of commission from the king.
For know, my lords, the states of Christendom,
Moved with remorse of these outrageous broils,
Have earnestly implored a general peace
Betwixt our nation and the aspiring French;
And here at hand the Dauphin and his train
Approacheth, to confer about some matter.
Is all our travail turnd to this effect?
After the slaughter of so many peers,
