His wife, ant like your worship.
Hadst thou been his mother, thou couldst have
better told.
Where wert thou born?
At Berwick in the north, ant like your grace.
Poor soul, Gods goodness hath been great to thee:
Let never day nor night unhallowd pass,
But still remember what the Lord hath done.
Tell me, good fellow, camest thou here by chance,
Or of devotion, to this holy shrine?
God knows, of pure devotion; being calld
A hundred times and oftener, in my sleep,
By good Saint Alban; who said, Simpcox, come,
Come, offer at my shrine, and I will help thee.
Most true, forsooth; and many time and oft
Myself have heard a voice to call him so.
What, art thou lame?
Ay, God Almighty help me!
How camest thou so?
A fall off of a tree.
A plum-tree, master.
How long hast thou been blind?
Born so, master.
What, and wouldst climb a tree?
But that in all my life, when I was a youth.
Too true; and bought his climbing very dear.
Mass, thou lovedst plums well, that wouldst
venture so.
Alas,  good master, my wife desired some damsons,
And made me climb, with danger of my life.
A subtle knave! but yet it shall not serve.
Let me see thine eyes: wink now: now open them:
In my opinion yet thou seest not well.
Yes, master, clear as day, I thank God and
Saint Alban.
Sayst thou me so? What colour is this cloak of?
Red, master; red as blood.
Why, thats well said. What colour is my gown of?
Black, forsooth: coal-black as jet.
Why, then, thou knowst what colour jet is of?
And yet, I think, jet did he never see.
But cloaks and gowns, before this day, a many.
Never, before this day, in all his life.
Tell me, sirrah, whats my name?
Alas, master, I know not.
Whats his name?
I know not.
Nor his?
No, indeed, master.
Whats thine own name?
Saunder Simpcox, an if it please you, master.
Then, Saunder, sit there, the lyingest knave in
Christendom. If thou hadst been born blind, thou
mightest as well have known all our names as thus to
name the several colours we do wear. Sight may
distinguish of colours, but suddenly to nominate them
all, it is impossible. My lords, Saint Alban here
hath done a miracle; and would ye not think his
cunning to be great, that could restore this cripple
to his legs again?
O master, that you could!
My masters of Saint Albans, have you not beadles in
your town, and things called whips?
Yes, my lord, if it please your grace.
Then send for one presently.
Sirrah, go fetch the beadle hither straight.
Exit an Attendant
Now fetch me a stool hither by and by. Now, sirrah,
if you mean to save yourself from whipping, leap me
over this stool and run away.
Alas, master, I am not able to stand alone:
You go about to torture me in vain.
Enter a Beadle with whips
Well, sir, we must have you find your legs. Sirrah
beadle, whip him till he leap over that same stool.
I will, my lord. Come on, sirrah; off with your
doublet quickly.
Alas, master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.
After the Beadle hath hit him once, he leaps over the stool and runs away; and they follow and cry, A miracle!
O God, seest Thou this, and bearest so long?
It made me laugh to see the villain run.
Follow the knave; and take this drab away.
Alas, sir, we did it for pure need.
Let them be whipped through every market-town, till
they come to Berwick, from whence they came.
Exeunt Wife, Beadle, Mayor,  and c
Duke Humphrey has done a miracle to-day.
True; made the lame to leap and fly away.
But you have done more miracles than I;
You made in a day, my lord, whole towns to fly.
Enter BUCKINGHAM
What tidings with our cousin Buckingham?
Such as my heart doth tremble to unfold.
A sort of naughty persons, lewdly bent,
Under the countenance and confederacy
Of Lady Eleanor, the protectors wife,
The ringleader and head of all this rout,
Have practised dangerously against your state,
Dealing with witches and with conjurers:
Whom we have apprehended in the fact;
Raising up wicked spirits from under ground,
Demanding of King Henrys life and death,
And other of your highness privy-council;
As more at large your grace shall understand.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  And so, my lord protector,
by this means
Your lady is forthcoming yet at London.
This news, I think, hath turnd your weapons edge;
Tis like, my lord, you will not keep your hour.
Ambitious churchman, leave to afflict my heart:
Sorrow and grief have vanquishd all my powers;
And, vanquishd as I am, I yield to thee,
Or to the meanest groom.
O God, what mischiefs work the wicked ones,
Heaping confusion on their own heads thereby!
Gloucester, see here the tainture of thy nest.
And look thyself be faultless, thou wert best.
Madam, for myself, to heaven I do appeal,
How I have loved my king and commonweal:
And, for my wife, I know not how it stands;
Sorry I am to hear what I have heard:
Noble she is, but if she have forgot
Honour and virtue and conversed with such
As, like to pitch, defile nobility,
I banish her my bed and company
And give her as a prey to law and shame,
That hath dishonourd Gloucesters honest name.
Well, for this night we will repose us here:
To-morrow toward London back again,
To look into this business thoroughly
And call these foul offenders to their answers
And poise the cause in justice equal scales,
Whose beam stands sure, whose rightful cause prevails.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE II. London. YORKS garden.
Enter YORK, SALISBURY, and WARWICK
Now, my good Lords of Salisbury and Warwick,
Our simple supper ended, give me leave
In this close walk to satisfy myself,
In craving your opinion of my title,
Which is infallible, to Englands crown.
My lord, I long to hear it at full.
Sweet York, begin: and if thy claim be good,
The Nevils are thy subjects to command.
Then thus:
Edward the Third, my lords, had seven sons:
The first, Edward the Black Prince, Prince of Wales;
The second, William of Hatfield, and the third,
Lionel Duke of Clarence: next to whom
Was John of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster;
The fifth was Edmund Langley, Duke of York;
The sixth was Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester;
William of Windsor was the seventh and last.
Edward the Black Prince died before his father
And left behind him Richard, his only son,
Who after Edward the Thirds death reignd as king;
Till Henry Bolingbroke, Duke of Lancaster,
The eldest son and heir of John of Gaunt,
Crownd by the name of Henry the Fourth,
Seized on the realm, deposed the rightful king,
Sent his poor queen to France, from whence she came,
And him to Pomfret; where, as all you know,
Harmless Richard was murderd traitorously.
Father, the duke hath told the truth:
Thus got the house of Lancaster the crown.
Which now they hold by force and not by right;
For Richard, the first sons heir, being dead,
The issue of the next son should have reignd.
But William of Hatfield died without an heir.
The third son, Duke of Clarence, from whose line
I claimed the crown, had issue, Philippe, a daughter,
Who married Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March:
Edmund had issue, Roger Earl of March;
Roger had issue, Edmund, Anne and Eleanor.
This Edmund, in the reign of Bolingbroke,
As I have read, laid claim unto the crown;
And, but for Owen Glendower, had been king,
Who kept him in captivity till he died.
But to the rest.
His eldest sister, Anne,
My mother, being heir unto the crown
Married Richard Earl of Cambridge; who was son
To Edmund Langley, Edward the Thirds fifth son.
By her I claim the kingdom: she was heir
To Roger Earl of March, who was the son
Of Edmund Mortimer, who married Philippe,
Sole daughter unto Lionel Duke of Clarence:
So, if the issue of the elder son
Succeed before the younger, I am king.
What plain proceeding is more plain than this?
Henry doth claim the crown from John of Gaunt,
The fourth son; York claims it from the third.
Till Lionels issue fails, his should not reign:
It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee
And in thy sons, fair slips of such a stock.
Then, father Salisbury, kneel we together;
And in this private plot be we the first
That shall salute our rightful sovereign
With honour of his birthright to the crown.
Long live our sovereign Richard, Englands king!
We thank you, lords. But I am not your king
Till I be crownd and that my sword be staind
With heart-blood of the house of Lancaster;
And thats not suddenly to be performd,
But with advice and silent secrecy.
Do you as I do in these dangerous days:
Wink at the Duke of Suffolks insolence,
At Beauforts pride, at Somersets ambition,
At Buckingham and all the crew of them,
Till they have snared the shepherd of the flock,
That virtuous prince, the good Duke Humphrey:
Tis that they seek, and they in seeking that
Shall find their deaths, if York can prophesy.
My lord, break we off; we know your mind at full.
My heart assures me that the Earl of Warwick
Shall one day make the Duke of York a king.
And, Nevil, this I do assure myself:
Richard shall live to make the Earl of Warwick
The greatest man in England but the king.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A hall of justice.
Sound trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN  MARGARET, GLOUCESTER, YORK, SUFFOLK, and SALISBURY;  the DUCHESS, MARGARET JOURDAIN, SOUTHWELL, HUME, and BOLINGBROKE, under guard
Stand forth, Dame Eleanor Cobham, Gloucesters wife:
In sight of God and us, your guilt is great:
Receive the sentence of the law for sins
Such as by Gods book are adjudged to death.
You four, from hence to prison back again;
From thence unto the place of execution:
The witch in Smithfield shall be burnd to ashes,
And you three shall be strangled on the gallows.
You, madam, for you are more nobly born,
Despoiled of your honour in your life,
Shall, after three days open penance done,
Live in your country here in banishment,
With Sir John Stanley, in the Isle of Man.
Welcome is banishment; welcome were my death.
Eleanor, the law, thou seest, hath judged thee:
I cannot justify whom the law condemns.
Exeunt DUCHESS and other prisoners, guarded
Mine eyes are full of tears, my heart of grief.
Ah, Humphrey, this dishonour in thine age
Will bring thy head with sorrow to the ground!
I beseech your majesty, give me leave to go;
Sorrow would solace and mine age would ease.
Stay, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester: ere thou go,
Give up thy staff: Henry will to himself
Protector be; and God shall be my hope,
My stay, my guide and lantern to my feet:
And go in peace, Humphrey, no less beloved
Than when thou wert protector to thy King.
I see no reason why a king of years
Should be to be protected like a child.
God and King Henry govern Englands realm.
Give up your staff, sir, and the king his realm.
My staff? here, noble Henry, is my staff:
As willingly do I the same resign
As eer thy father Henry made it mine;
And even as willingly at thy feet I leave it
As others would ambitiously receive it.
Farewell, good king: when I am dead and gone,
May honourable peace attend thy throne!
Exit
Why, now is Henry king, and Margaret queen;
And Humphrey Duke of Gloucester scarce himself,
That bears so shrewd a maim; two pulls at once;
His lady banishd, and a limb loppd off.
This staff of honour raught, there let it stand
Where it best fits to be, in Henrys hand.
Thus droops this lofty pine and hangs his sprays;
Thus Eleanors pride dies in her youngest days.
Lords, let him go. Please it your majesty,
This is the day appointed for the combat;
And ready are the appellant and defendant,
The armourer and his man, to enter the lists,
So please your highness to behold the fight.
Ay, good my lord; for purposely therefore
Left I the court, to see this quarrel tried.
O Gods name, see the lists and all things fit:
Here let them end it; and God defend the right!
I never saw a fellow worse bested,
Or more afraid to fight, than is the appellant,
The servant of this armourer, my lords.
Enter at one door, HORNER, the Armourer, and his  Neighbours, drinking to him so much that he is drunk;  and he enters with a drum before him and his staff  with a sand-bag fastened to it; and at the other  door PETER, his man, with a drum and sand-bag, and Prentices drinking to him
Here, neighbour Horner, I drink to you in a cup of
sack: and fear not, neighbour, you shall do well enough.
And here, neighbour, heres a cup of charneco.
And heres a pot of good double beer, neighbour:
drink, and fear not your man.
Let it come, i faith, and Ill pledge you all; and
a fig for Peter!
First PrenticeHere, Peter, I drink to thee: and be not afraid.
Second PrenticeBe merry, Peter, and fear not thy master: fight
for credit of the prentices.
I thank you all: drink, and pray for me, I pray
you; for I think I have taken my last draught in
this world. Here, Robin, an if I die, I give thee
my apron: and, Will, thou shalt have my hammer:
and here, Tom, take all the money that I have. O
Lord bless me! I pray God! for I am never able to
deal with my master, he hath learnt me so much fence already.
Come, leave your drinking, and fall to blows.
Sirrah, whats thy name?
Peter, forsooth.
Peter! what more?
Thump.
Thump! then see thou thump thy master well.
Masters, I am come hither, as it were, upon my mans
instigation, to prove him a knave and myself an
honest man: and touching the Duke of York, I will
take my death, I never meant him any ill, nor the
king, nor the queen: and therefore, Peter, have at
thee with a downright blow!
Dispatch: this knaves tongue begins to double.
Sound, trumpets, alarum to the combatants!
Alarum. They fight, and PETER strikes him down
Hold, Peter, hold! I confess, I confess treason.
Dies
Take away his weapon. Fellow, thank God, and the
good wine in thy masters way.
O God, have I overcome mine enemy in this presence?
O Peter, thou hast prevailed in right!
Go, take hence that traitor from our sight;
For his death we do perceive his guilt:
And God in justice hath revealed to us
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Which he had thought to have murderd wrongfully.
Come, fellow, follow us for thy reward.
Sound a flourish. Exeunt
SCENE IV. A street.
Enter GLOUCESTER and his Servingmen, in mourning cloaks
Thus sometimes hath the brightest day a cloud;
And after summer evermore succeeds
Barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold:
So cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet.
Sirs, whats oclock?
Ten, my lord.
Ten is the hour that was appointed me
To watch the coming of my punishd duchess:
Uneath may she endure the flinty streets,
To tread them with her tender-feeling feet.
Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrook
The abject people gazing on thy face,
With envious looks, laughing at thy shame,
That erst did follow thy proud chariot-wheels
When thou didst ride in triumph through the streets.
But, soft! I think she comes; and Ill prepare
My tear-staind eyes to see her miseries.
Enter the DUCHESS in a white sheet, and a taper  burning in her hand; with STANLEY, the Sheriff, and Officers
So please your grace, well take her from the sheriff.
No, stir not, for your lives; let her pass by.
Come you, my lord, to see my open shame?
Now thou dost penance too. Look how they gaze!
See how the giddy multitude do point,
And nod their heads, and throw their eyes on thee!
Ah, Gloucester, hide thee from their hateful looks,
And, in thy closet pent up, rue my shame,
And ban thine enemies, both mine and thine!
Be patient, gentle Nell; forget this grief.
Ah, Gloucester, teach me to forget myself!
For whilst I think I am thy married wife
And thou a prince, protector of this land,
Methinks I should not thus be led along,
Maild up in shame, with papers on my back,
And followed with a rabble that rejoice
To see my tears and hear my deep-fet groans.
The ruthless flint doth cut my tender feet,
And when I start, the envious people laugh
And bid me be advised how I tread.
Ah, Humphrey, can I bear this shameful yoke?
Trowst thou that eer Ill look upon the world,
Or count them happy that enjoy the sun?
No; dark shall be my light and night my day;
To think upon my pomp shall be my hell.
Sometime Ill say, I am Duke Humphreys wife,
And he a prince and ruler of the land:
Yet so he ruled and such a prince he was
As he stood by whilst I, his forlorn duchess,
Was made a wonder and a pointing-stock
To every idle rascal follower.
But be thou mild and blush not at my shame,
Nor stir at nothing till the axe of death
Hang over thee, as, sure, it shortly will;
For Suffolk, he that can do all in all
With her that hateth thee and hates us all,
And York and impious Beaufort, that false priest,
Have all limed bushes to betray thy wings,
And, fly thou how thou canst, theyll tangle thee:
But fear not thou, until thy foot be snared,
Nor never seek prevention of thy foes.
Ah, Nell, forbear! thou aimest all awry;
I must offend before I be attainted;
And had I twenty times so many foes,
And each of them had twenty times their power,
All these could not procure me any scathe,
So long as I am loyal, true and crimeless.
Wouldst have me rescue thee from this reproach?
Why, yet thy scandal were not wiped away
But I in danger for the breach of law.
Thy greatest help is quiet, gentle Nell:
I pray thee, sort thy heart to patience;
These few days wonder will be quickly worn.
Enter a Herald
I summon your grace to his majestys parliament,
Holden at Bury the first of this next month.
And my consent neer askd herein before!
This is close dealing. Well, I will be there.
Exit Herald
My Nell, I take my leave: and, master sheriff,
Let not her penance exceed the kings commission.
Ant please your grace, here my commission stays,
And Sir John Stanley is appointed now
To take her with him to the Isle of Man.
Must you, Sir John, protect my lady here?
So am I given in charge, mayt please your grace.
Entreat her not the worse in that I pray
You use her well: the world may laugh again;
And I may live to do you kindness if
You do it her: and so, Sir John, farewell!
What, gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell!
Witness my tears, I cannot stay to speak.
Exeunt GLOUCESTER and Servingmen
Art thou gone too? all comfort go with thee!
For none abides with me: my joy is death;
Death, at whose name I oft have been afeard,
Because I wishd this worlds eternity.
Stanley, I prithee, go, and take me hence;
I care not whither, for I beg no favour,
Only convey me where thou art commanded.
Why, madam, that is to the Isle of Man;
There to be used according to your state.
Thats bad enough, for I am but reproach:
And shall I then be used reproachfully?
Like to a duchess, and Duke Humphreys lady;
According to that state you shall be used.
Sheriff, farewell, and better than I fare,
Although thou hast been conduct of my shame.
It is my office; and, madam, pardon me.
Ay, ay, farewell; thy office is discharged.
Come, Stanley, shall we go?
Madam, your penance done, throw off this sheet,
And go we to attire you for our journey.
My shame will not be shifted with my sheet:
No, it will hang upon my richest robes
And show itself, attire me how I can.
Go, lead the way; I long to see my prison.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. The Abbey at Bury St. Edmunds.
Sound a sennet. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN  MARGARET, CARDINAL, SUFFOLK, YORK, BUCKINGHAM, SALISBURY and WARWICK to the Parliament
I muse my Lord of Gloucester is not come:
Tis not his wont to be the hindmost man,
Whateer occasion keeps him from us now.
Can you not see? or will ye not observe
The strangeness of his alterd countenance?
With what a majesty he bears himself,
How insolent of late he is become,
How proud, how peremptory, and unlike himself?
We know the time since he was mild and affable,
And if we did but glance a far-off look,
Immediately he was upon his knee,
That all the court admired him for submission:
But meet him now, and, be it in the morn,
When every one will give the time of day,
He knits his brow and shows an angry eye,
And passeth by with stiff unbowed knee,
Disdaining duty that to us belongs.
Small curs are not regarded when they grin;
But great men tremble when the lion roars;
And Humphrey is no little man in England.
First note that he is near you in descent,
And should you fall, he as the next will mount.
Me seemeth then it is no policy,
Respecting what a rancorous mind he bears
And his advantage following your decease,
That he should come about your royal person
Or be admitted to your highness council.
By flattery hath he won the commons hearts,
And when he please to make commotion,
Tis to be feard they all will follow him.
Now tis the spring, and weeds are shallow-rooted;
Suffer them now, and theyll oergrow the garden
And choke the herbs for want of husbandry.
The reverent care I bear unto my lord
Made me collect these dangers in the duke.
If it be fond, call it a womans fear;
Which fear if better reasons can supplant,
I will subscribe and say I wrongd the duke.
My Lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
Reprove my allegation, if you can;
Or else conclude my words effectual.
Well hath your highness seen into this duke;
And, had I first been put to speak my mind,
I think I should have told your graces tale.
The duchess, by his subornation,
Upon my life, began her devilish practises:
Or, if he were not privy to those faults,
Yet, by reputing of his high descent,
As next the king he was successive heir,
And such high vaunts of his nobility,
Did instigate the bedlam brain-sick duchess
By wicked means to frame our sovereigns fall.
Smooth runs the water where the brook is deep;
And in his simple show he harbours treason.
The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb.
No, no, my sovereign; Gloucester is a man
Unsounded yet and full of deep deceit.
Did he not, contrary to form of law,
Devise strange deaths for small offences done?
And did he not, in his protectorship,
Levy great sums of money through the realm
For soldiers pay in France, and never sent it?
By means whereof the towns each day revolted.
Tut, these are petty faults to faults unknown.
Which time will bring to light in smooth
Duke Humphrey.
My lords, at once: the care you have of us,
To mow down thorns that would annoy our foot,
Is worthy praise: but, shall I speak my conscience,
Our kinsman Gloucester is as innocent
From meaning treason to our royal person
As is the sucking lamb or harmless dove:
The duke is virtuous, mild and too well given
To dream on evil or to work my downfall.
Ah, whats more dangerous than this fond affiance!
Seems he a dove? his feathers are but borrowed,
For hes disposed as the hateful raven:
Is he a lamb? his skin is surely lent him,
For hes inclined as is the ravenous wolf.
Who cannot steal a shape that means deceit?
Take heed, my lord; the welfare of us all
Hangs on the cutting short that fraudful man.
Enter SOMERSET
All health unto my gracious sovereign!
Welcome, Lord Somerset. What news from France?
That all your interest in those territories
Is utterly bereft you; all is lost.
Cold news, Lord Somerset: but Gods will be done!
[Aside]  Cold news for me; for I had hope of France
As firmly as I hope for fertile England.
Thus are my blossoms blasted in the bud
And caterpillars eat my leaves away;
But I will remedy this gear ere long,
Or sell my title for a glorious grave.
Enter GLOUCESTER
All happiness unto my lord the king!
Pardon, my liege, that I have stayd so long.
Nay, Gloucester, know that thou art come too soon,
Unless thou wert more loyal than thou art:
I do arrest thee of high treason here.
Well, Suffolk, thou shalt not see me blush
Nor change my countenance for this arrest:
A heart unspotted is not easily daunted.
The purest spring is not so free from mud
As I am clear from treason to my sovereign:
Who can accuse me? wherein am I guilty?
Tis thought, my lord, that you took bribes of France,
And, being protector, stayed the soldiers pay;
By means whereof his highness hath lost France.
Is it but thought so? what are they that think it?
I never robbd the soldiers of their pay,
Nor ever had one penny bribe from France.
So help me God, as I have watchd the night,
Ay, night by night, in studying good for England,
That doit that eer I wrested from the king,
Or any groat I hoarded to my use,
Be brought against me at my trial-day!
No; many a pound of mine own proper store,
Because I would not tax the needy commons,
Have I disbursed to the garrisons,
And never askd for restitution.
It serves you well, my lord, to say so much.
I say no more than truth, so help me God!
In your protectorship you did devise
Strange tortures for offenders never heard of,
That England was defamed by tyranny.
Why, tis well known that, whiles I was
protector,
Pity was all the fault that was in me;
For I should melt at an offenders tears,
And lowly words were ransom for their fault.
Unless it were a bloody murderer,
Or foul felonious thief that fleeced poor passengers,
I never gave them condign punishment:
Murder indeed, that bloody sin, I tortured
Above the felon or what trespass else.
My lord, these faults are easy, quickly answered:
But mightier crimes are laid unto your charge,
Whereof you cannot easily purge yourself.
I do arrest you in his highness name;
And here commit you to my lord cardinal
To keep, until your further time of trial.
My lord of Gloucester, tis my special hope
That you will clear yourself from all suspect:
My conscience tells me you are innocent.
Ah, gracious lord, these days are dangerous:
Virtue is choked with foul ambition
And charity chased hence by rancours hand;
Foul subornation is predominant
And equity exiled your highness land.
I know their complot is to have my life,
And if my death might make this island happy,
And prove the period of their tyranny,
I would expend it with all willingness:
But mine is made the prologue to their play;
For thousands more, that yet suspect no peril,
Will not conclude their plotted tragedy.
Beauforts red sparkling eyes blab his hearts malice,
And Suffolks cloudy brow his stormy hate;
Sharp Buckingham unburthens with his tongue
The envious load that lies upon his heart;
And dogged York, that reaches at the moon,
Whose overweening arm I have pluckd back,
By false accuse doth level at my life:
And you, my sovereign lady, with the rest,
Causeless have laid disgraces on my head,
And with your best endeavour have stirrd up
My liefest liege to be mine enemy:
Ay, all you have laid your heads together--
Myself had notice of your conventicles--
And all to make away my guiltless life.
I shall not want false witness to condemn me,
Nor store of treasons to augment my guilt;
The ancient proverb will be well effected:
A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.
My liege, his railing is intolerable:
If those that care to keep your royal person
From treasons secret knife and traitors rage
Be thus upbraided, chid and rated at,
And the offender granted scope of speech,
Twill make them cool in zeal unto your grace.
Hath he not twit our sovereign lady here
With ignominious words, though clerkly couchd,
As if she had suborned some to swear
False allegations to oerthrow his state?
But I can give the loser leave to chide.
Far truer spoke than meant: I lose, indeed;
Beshrew the winners, for they playd me false!
And well such losers may have leave to speak.
Hell wrest the sense and hold us here all day:
Lord cardinal, he is your prisoner.
Sirs, take away the duke, and guard him sure.
Ah! thus King Henry throws away his crutch
Before his legs be firm to bear his body.
Thus is the shepherd beaten from thy side,
And wolves are gnarling who shall gnaw thee first.
Ah, that my fear were false! ah, that it were!
For, good King Henry, thy decay I fear.
Exit, guarded
My lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best,
Do or undo, as if ourself were here.
What, will your highness leave the parliament?
Ay, Margaret; my heart is drownd with grief,
Whose flood begins to flow within mine eyes,
My body round engirt with misery,
For whats more miserable than discontent?
Ah, uncle Humphrey! in thy face I see
The map of honour, truth and loyalty:
And yet, good Humphrey, is the hour to come
That eer I proved thee false or feard thy faith.
What louring star now envies thy estate,
That these great lords and Margaret our queen
Do seek subversion of thy harmless life?
Thou never didst them wrong, nor no man wrong;
And as the butcher takes away the calf
And binds the wretch, and beats it when it strays,
Bearing it to the bloody slaughter-house,
Even so remorseless have they borne him hence;
And as the dam runs lowing up and down,
Looking the way her harmless young one went,
And can do nought but wail her darlings loss,
Even so myself bewails good Gloucesters case
With sad unhelpful tears, and with dimmd eyes
Look after him and cannot do him good,
So mighty are his vowed enemies.
His fortunes I will weep; and, twixt each groan
Say Whos a traitor? Gloucester he is none.
Exeunt all but QUEEN MARGARET, CARDINAL, SUFFOLK, and YORK; SOMERSET remains apart
Free lords, cold snow melts with the suns hot beams.
Henry my lord is cold in great affairs,
Too full of foolish pity, and Gloucesters show
Beguiles him as the mournful crocodile
With sorrow snares relenting passengers,
Or as the snake rolld in a flowering bank,
With shining chequerd slough, doth sting a child
That for the beauty thinks it excellent.
Believe me, lords, were none more wise than I--
And yet herein I judge mine own wit good--
This Gloucester should be quickly rid the world,
To rid us of the fear we have of him.
That he should die is worthy policy;
But yet we want a colour for his death:
Tis meet he be condemnd by course of law.
But, in my mind, that were no policy:
The king will labour still to save his life,
The commons haply rise, to save his life;
And yet we have but trivial argument,
More than mistrust, that shows him worthy death.
So that, by this, you would not have him die.
Ah, York, no man alive so fain as I!
Tis York that hath more reason for his death.
But, my lord cardinal, and you, my Lord of Suffolk,
Say as you think, and speak it from your souls,
Weret not all one, an empty eagle were set
To guard the chicken from a hungry kite,
As place Duke Humphrey for the kings protector?
So the poor chicken should be sure of death.
Madam, tis true; and weret not madness, then,
To make the fox surveyor of the fold?
Who being accused a crafty murderer,
His guilt should be but idly posted over,
Because his purpose is not executed.
No; let him die, in that he is a fox,
By nature proved an enemy to the flock,
Before his chaps be staind with crimson blood,
As Humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege.
And do not stand on quillets how to slay him:
Be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety,
Sleeping or waking, tis no matter how,
So he be dead; for that is good deceit
Which mates him first that first intends deceit.
Thrice-noble Suffolk, tis resolutely spoke.
Not resolute, except so much were done;
For things are often spoke and seldom meant:
But that my heart accordeth with my tongue,
Seeing the deed is meritorious,
And to preserve my sovereign from his foe,
Say but the word, and I will be his priest.
But I would have him dead, my Lord of Suffolk,
Ere you can take due orders for a priest:
Say you consent and censure well the deed,
And Ill provide his executioner,
I tender so the safety of my liege.
Here is my hand, the deed is worthy doing.
And so say I.
And I    and now we three have spoke it,
It skills not greatly who impugns our doom.
Enter a Post
Great lords, from Ireland am I come amain,
To signify that rebels there are up
And put the Englishmen unto the sword:
Send succors, lords, and stop the rage betime,
Before the wound do grow uncurable;
For, being green, there is great hope of help.
A breach that craves a quick expedient stop!
What counsel give you in this weighty cause?
That Somerset be sent as regent thither:
Tis meet that lucky ruler be employd;
Witness the fortune he hath had in France.
If York, with all his far-fet policy,
Had been the regent there instead of me,
He never would have stayd in France so long.
No, not to lose it all, as thou hast done:
I rather would have lost my life betimes
Than bring a burthen of dishonour home
By staying there so long till all were lost.
Show me one scar characterd on thy skin:
Mens flesh preserved so whole do seldom win.
Nay, then, this spark will prove a raging fire,
If wind and fuel be brought to feed it with:
No more, good York; sweet Somerset, be still:
Thy fortune, York, hadst thou been regent there,
Might happily have proved far worse than his.
What, worse than nought? nay, then, a shame take all!
And, in the number, thee that wishest shame!
My Lord of York, try what your fortune is.
The uncivil kerns of Ireland are in arms
And temper clay with blood of Englishmen:
To Ireland will you lead a band of men,
Collected choicely, from each county some,
And try your hap against the Irishmen?
I will, my lord, so please his majesty.
Why, our authority is his consent,
And what we do establish he confirms:
Then, noble York, take thou this task in hand.
I am content: provide me soldiers, lords,
Whiles I take order for mine own affairs.
A charge, Lord York, that I will see performd.
But now return we to the false Duke Humphrey.
No more of him; for I will deal with him
That henceforth he shall trouble us no more.
And so break off; the day is almost spent:
Lord Suffolk, you and I must talk of that event.
My Lord of Suffolk, within fourteen days
At Bristol I expect my soldiers;
For there Ill ship them all for Ireland.
Ill see it truly done, my Lord of York.
Exeunt all but YORK
Now, York, or never, steel thy fearful thoughts,
And change misdoubt to resolution:
Be that thou hopest to be, or what thou art
Resign to death; it is not worth the enjoying:
Let pale-faced fear keep with the mean-born man,
And find no harbour in a royal heart.
Faster than spring-time showers comes thought
on thought,
And not a thought but thinks on dignity.
My brain more busy than the labouring spider
Weaves tedious snares to trap mine enemies.
Well, nobles, well, tis politicly done,
To send me packing with an host of men:
I fear me you but warm the starved snake,
Who, cherishd in your breasts, will sting
your hearts.
Twas men I lackd and you will give them me:
I take it kindly; and yet be well assured
You put sharp weapons in a madmans hands.
Whiles I in Ireland nourish a mighty band,
I will stir up in England some black storm
Shall blow ten thousand souls to heaven or hell;
And this fell tempest shall not cease to rage
Until the golden circuit on my head,
Like to the glorious suns transparent beams,
Do calm the fury of this mad-bred flaw.
And, for a minister of my intent,
I have seduced a headstrong Kentishman,
John Cade of Ashford,
To make commotion, as full well he can,
Under the title of John Mortimer.
In Ireland have I seen this stubborn Cade
Oppose himself against a troop of kerns,
And fought so long, till that his thighs with darts
Were almost like a sharp-quilld porpentine;
And, in the end being rescued, I have seen
Him caper upright like a wild Morisco,
Shaking the bloody darts as he his bells.
Full often, like a shag-haird crafty kern,
Hath he conversed with the enemy,
And undiscoverd come to me again
And given me notice of their villanies.
This devil here shall be my substitute;
For that John Mortimer, which now is dead,
In face, in gait, in speech, he doth resemble:
By this I shall perceive the commons mind,
How they affect the house and claim of York.
Say he be taken, rackd and tortured,
I know no pain they can inflict upon him
Will make him say I moved him to those arms.
Say that he thrive, as tis great like he will,
Why, then from Ireland come I with my strength
And reap the harvest which that rascal sowd;
For Humphrey being dead, as he shall be,
And Henry put apart, the next for me.
Exit
SCENE II. Bury St. Edmunds. A room of state.
Enter certain Murderers, hastily
Run to my Lord of Suffolk; let him know
We have dispatchd the duke, as he commanded.
O that it were to do! What have we done?
Didst ever hear a man so penitent?
Enter SUFFOLK
Here comes my lord.
Now, sirs, have you dispatchd this thing?
Ay, my good lord, hes dead.
Why, thats well said. Go, get you to my house;
I will reward you for this venturous deed.
The king and all the peers are here at hand.
Have you laid fair the bed? Is all things well,
According as I gave directions?
Tis, my good lord.
Away! be gone.
Exeunt Murderers
Sound trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, CARDINAL, SOMERSET, with Attendants
Go, call our uncle to our presence straight;
Say we intend to try his grace to-day.
If he be guilty, as tis published.
Ill call him presently, my noble lord.
Exit
Lords, take your places; and, I pray you all,
Proceed no straiter gainst our uncle Gloucester
Than from true evidence of good esteem
He be approved in practise culpable.
God forbid any malice should prevail,
That faultless may condemn a nobleman!
Pray God he may acquit him of suspicion!
I thank thee, Meg; these words content me much.
Re-enter SUFFOLK
How now! why lookst thou pale? why tremblest thou?
Where is our uncle? whats the matter, Suffolk?
Dead in his bed, my lord; Gloucester is dead.
Marry, God forfend!
Gods secret judgment: I did dream to-night
The duke was dumb and could not speak a word.
KING HENRY VI swoons
How fares my lord? Help, lords! the king is dead.
Rear up his body; wring him by the nose.
Run, go, help, help! O Henry, ope thine eyes!
He doth revive again: madam, be patient.
O heavenly God!
How fares my gracious lord?
Comfort, my sovereign! gracious Henry, comfort!
What, doth my Lord of Suffolk comfort me?
Came he right now to sing a ravens note,
Whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers;
And thinks he that the chirping of a wren,
By crying comfort from a hollow breast,
Can chase away the first-conceived sound?
Hide not thy poison with such sugard words;
Lay not thy hands on me; forbear, I say;
Their touch affrights me as a serpents sting.
Thou baleful messenger, out of my sight!
Upon thy eye-balls murderous tyranny
Sits in grim majesty, to fright the world.
Look not upon me, for thine eyes are wounding:
Yet do not go away: come, basilisk,
And kill the innocent gazer with thy sight;
For in the shade of death I shall find joy;
In life but double death, now Gloucesters dead.
Why do you rate my Lord of Suffolk thus?
Although the duke was enemy to him,
Yet he most Christian-like laments his death:
And for myself, foe as he was to me,
Might liquid tears or heart-offending groans
Or blood-consuming sighs recall his life,
I would be blind with weeping, sick with groans,
Look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs,
And all to have the noble duke alive.
What know I how the world may deem of me?
For it is known we were but hollow friends:
It may be judged I made the duke away;
So shall my name with slanders tongue be wounded,
And princes courts be filld with my reproach.
This get I by his death: ay me, unhappy!
To be a queen, and crownd with infamy!
Ah, woe is me for Gloucester, wretched man!
Be woe for me, more wretched than he is.
What, dost thou turn away and hide thy face?
I am no loathsome leper; look on me.
What! art thou, like the adder, waxen deaf?
Be poisonous too and kill thy forlorn queen.
Is all thy comfort shut in Gloucesters tomb?
Why, then, dame Margaret was neer thy joy.
Erect his statue and worship it,
And make my image but an alehouse sign.
Was I for this nigh wreckd upon the sea
And twice by awkward wind from Englands bank
Drove back again unto my native clime?
What boded this, but well forewarning wind
Did seem to say Seek not a scorpions nest,
Nor set no footing on this unkind shore?
What did I then, but cursed the gentle gusts
And he that loosed them forth their brazen caves:
And bid them blow towards Englands blessed shore,
Or turn our stern upon a dreadful rock
Yet AEolus would not be a murderer,
But left that hateful office unto thee:
The pretty-vaulting sea refused to drown me,
Knowing that thou wouldst have me drownd on shore,
With tears as salt as sea, through thy unkindness:
The splitting rocks cowerd in the sinking sands
And would not dash me with their ragged sides,
Because thy flinty heart, more hard than they,
Might in thy palace perish Margaret.
As far as I could ken thy chalky cliffs,
When from thy shore the tempest beat us back,
I stood upon the hatches in the storm,
And when the dusky sky began to rob
My earnest-gaping sight of thy lands view,
I took a costly jewel from my neck,
A heart it was, bound in with diamonds,
And threw it towards thy land: the sea received it,
And so I wishd thy body might my heart:
And even with this I lost fair Englands view
And bid mine eyes be packing with my heart
And calld them blind and dusky spectacles,
For losing ken of Albions wished coast.
How often have I tempted Suffolks tongue,
The agent of thy foul inconstancy,
To sit and witch me, as Ascanius did
When he to madding Dido would unfold
His fathers acts commenced in burning Troy!
Am I not witchd like her? or thou not false like him?
Ay me, I can no more! die, Margaret!
For Henry weeps that thou dost live so long.
Noise within. Enter WARWICK, SALISBURY, and many Commons
It is reported, mighty sovereign,
That good Duke Humphrey traitorously is murderd
By Suffolk and the Cardinal Beauforts means.
The commons, like an angry hive of bees
That want their leader, scatter up and down
And care not who they sting in his revenge.
Myself have calmd their spleenful mutiny,
Until they hear the order of his death.
That he is dead, good Warwick, tis too true;
But how he died God knows, not Henry:
Enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse,
And comment then upon his sudden death.
That shall I do, my liege. Stay, Salisbury,
With the rude multitude till I return.
Exit
O Thou that judgest all things, stay my thoughts,
My thoughts, that labour to persuade my soul
Some violent hands were laid on Humphreys life!
If my suspect be false, forgive me, God,
For judgment only doth belong to thee.
Fain would I go to chafe his paly lips
With twenty thousand kisses, and to drain
Upon his face an ocean of salt tears,
To tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk,
And with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling:
But all in vain are these mean obsequies;
