And to survey his dead and earthly image,
What were it but to make my sorrow greater?
Re-enter WARWICK and others, bearing GLOUCESTERS body on a bed
Come hither, gracious sovereign, view this body.
That is to see how deep my grave is made;
For with his soul fled all my worldly solace,
For seeing him I see my life in death.
As surely as my soul intends to live
With that dread King that took our state upon him
To free us from his fathers wrathful curse,
I do believe that violent hands were laid
Upon the life of this thrice-famed duke.
A dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue!
What instance gives Lord Warwick for his vow?
See how the blood is settled in his face.
Oft have I seen a timely-parted ghost,
Of ashy semblance, meagre, pale and bloodless,
Being all descended to the labouring heart;
Who, in the conflict that it holds with death,
Attracts the same for aidance gainst the enemy;
Which with the heart there cools and neer returneth
To blush and beautify the cheek again.
But see, his face is black and full of blood,
His eye-balls further out than when he lived,
Staring full ghastly like a strangled man;
His hair upreard, his nostrils stretched with struggling;
His hands abroad displayd, as one that graspd
And tuggd for life and was by strength subdued:
Look, on the sheets his hair you see, is sticking;
His well-proportiond beard made rough and rugged,
Like to the summers corn by tempest lodged.
It cannot be but he was murderd here;
The least of all these signs were probable.
Why, Warwick, who should do the duke to death?
Myself and Beaufort had him in protection;
And we, I hope, sir, are no murderers.
But both of you were vowd Duke Humphreys foes,
And you, forsooth, had the good duke to keep:
Tis like you would not feast him like a friend;
And tis well seen he found an enemy.
Then you, belike, suspect these noblemen
As guilty of Duke Humphreys timeless death.
Who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh
And sees fast by a butcher with an axe,
But will suspect twas he that made the slaughter?
Who finds the partridge in the puttocks nest,
But may imagine how the bird was dead,
Although the kite soar with unbloodied beak?
Even so suspicious is this tragedy.
Are you the butcher, Suffolk? Wheres your knife?
Is Beaufort termd a kite? Where are his talons?
I wear no knife to slaughter sleeping men;
But heres a vengeful sword, rusted with ease,
That shall be scoured in his rancorous heart
That slanders me with murders crimson badge.
Say, if thou darest, proud Lord of Warwick-shire,
That I am faulty in Duke Humphreys death.
Exeunt CARDINAL, SOMERSET, and others
What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him?
He dares not calm his contumelious spirit
Nor cease to be an arrogant controller,
Though Suffolk dare him twenty thousand times.
Madam, be still; with reverence may I say;
For every word you speak in his behalf
Is slander to your royal dignity.
Blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanor!
If ever lady wrongd her lord so much,
Thy mother took into her blameful bed
Some stern untutord churl, and noble stock
Was graft with crab-tree slip; whose fruit thou art,
And never of the Nevils noble race.
But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee
And I should rob the deathsman of his fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
And that my sovereigns presence makes me mild,
I would, false murderous coward, on thy knee
Make thee beg pardon for thy passed speech,
And say it was thy mother that thou meantst
That thou thyself was born in bastardy;
And after all this fearful homage done,
Give thee thy hire and send thy soul to hell,
Pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men!
Thou shall be waking well I shed thy blood,
If from this presence thou darest go with me.
Away even now, or I will drag thee hence:
Unworthy though thou art, Ill cope with thee
And do some service to Duke Humphreys ghost.
Exeunt SUFFOLK and WARWICK
What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted!
Thrice is he armed that hath his quarrel just,
And he but naked, though lockd up in steel
Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.
A noise within
What noise is this?
Re-enter SUFFOLK and WARWICK, with their weapons drawn
Why, how now, lords! your wrathful weapons drawn
Here in our presence! dare you be so bold?
Why, what tumultuous clamour have we here?
The traitorous Warwick with the men of Bury
Set all upon me, mighty sovereign.
[To the Commons, entering]  Sirs, stand apart;
the king shall know your mind.
Dread lord, the commons send you word by me,
Unless Lord Suffolk straight be done to death,
Or banished fair Englands territories,
They will by violence tear him from your palace
And torture him with grievous lingering death.
They say, by him the good Duke Humphrey died;
They say, in him they fear your highness death;
And mere instinct of love and loyalty,
Free from a stubborn opposite intent,
As being thought to contradict your liking,
Makes them thus forward in his banishment.
They say, in care of your most royal person,
That if your highness should intend to sleep
And charge that no man should disturb your rest
In pain of your dislike or pain of death,
Yet, notwithstanding such a strait edict,
Were there a serpent seen, with forked tongue,
That slily glided towards your majesty,
It were but necessary you were waked,
Lest, being sufferd in that harmful slumber,
The mortal worm might make the sleep eternal;
And therefore do they cry, though you forbid,
That they will guard you, whether you will or no,
From such fell serpents as false Suffolk is,
With whose envenomed and fatal sting,
Your loving uncle, twenty times his worth,
They say, is shamefully bereft of life.
[Within]  An answer from the king, my
Lord of Salisbury!
Tis like the commons, rude unpolishd hinds,
Could send such message to their sovereign:
But you, my lord, were glad to be employd,
To show how quaint an orator you are:
But all the honour Salisbury hath won
Is, that he was the lord ambassador
Sent from a sort of tinkers to the king.
[Within]  An answer from the king, or we will all break in!
Go, Salisbury, and tell them all from me.
I thank them for their tender loving care;
And had I not been cited so by them,
Yet did I purpose as they do entreat;
For, sure, my thoughts do hourly prophesy
Mischance unto my state by Suffolks means:
And therefore, by His majesty I swear,
Whose far unworthy deputy I am,
He shall not breathe infection in this air
But three days longer, on the pain of death.
Exit SALISBURY
O Henry, let me plead for gentle Suffolk!
Ungentle queen, to call him gentle Suffolk!
No more, I say: if thou dost plead for him,
Thou wilt but add increase unto my wrath.
Had I but said, I would have kept my word,
But when I swear, it is irrevocable.
If, after three days space, thou here best found
On any ground that I am ruler of,
The world shall not be ransom for thy life.
Come, Warwick, come, good Warwick, go with me;
I have great matters to impart to thee.
Exeunt all but QUEEN MARGARET and SUFFOLK
Mischance and sorrow go along with you!
Hearts discontent and sour affliction
Be playfellows to keep you company!
Theres two of you; the devil make a third!
And threefold vengeance tend upon your steps!
Cease, gentle queen, these execrations,
And let thy Suffolk take his heavy leave.
Fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch!
Hast thou not spirit to curse thine enemy?
A plague upon them! wherefore should I curse them?
Would curses kill, as doth the mandrakes groan,
I would invent as bitter-searching terms,
As curst, as harsh and horrible to hear,
Deliverd strongly through my fixed teeth,
With full as many signs of deadly hate,
As lean-faced Envy in her loathsome cave:
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words;
Mine eyes should sparkle like the beaten flint;
Mine hair be fixed on end, as one distract;
Ay, every joint should seem to curse and ban:
And even now my burthend heart would break,
Should I not curse them. Poison be their drink!
Gall, worse than gall, the daintiest that they taste!
Their sweetest shade a grove of cypress trees!
Their chiefest prospect murdering basilisks!
Their softest touch as smart as lizards sting!
Their music frightful as the serpents hiss,
And boding screech-owls make the concert full!
All the foul terrors in dark-seated hell--
Enough, sweet Suffolk; thou tormentst thyself;
And these dread curses, like the sun gainst glass,
Or like an overcharged gun, recoil,
And turn the force of them upon thyself.
You bade me ban, and will you bid me leave?
Now, by the ground that I am banishd from,
Well could I curse away a winters night,
Though standing naked on a mountain top,
Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
And think it but a minute spent in sport.
O, let me entreat thee cease. Give me thy hand,
That I may dew it with my mournful tears;
Nor let the rain of heaven wet this place,
To wash away my woful monuments.
O, could this kiss be printed in thy hand,
That thou mightst think upon these by the seal,
Through whom a thousand sighs are breathed for thee!
So, get thee gone, that I may know my grief;
Tis but surmised whiles thou art standing by,
As one that surfeits thinking on a want.
I will repeal thee, or, be well assured,
Adventure to be banished myself:
And banished I am, if but from thee.
Go; speak not to me; even now be gone.
O, go not yet! Even thus two friends condemnd
Embrace and kiss and take ten thousand leaves,
Loather a hundred times to part than die.
Yet now farewell; and farewell life with thee!
Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished;
Once by the king, and three times thrice by thee.
Tis not the land I care for, wert thou thence;
A wilderness is populous enough,
So Suffolk had thy heavenly company:
For where thou art, there is the world itself,
With every several pleasure in the world,
And where thou art not, desolation.
I can no more: live thou to joy thy life;
Myself no joy in nought but that thou livest.
Enter VAUX
Wither goes Vaux so fast? what news, I prithee?
To signify unto his majesty
That Cardinal Beaufort is at point of death;
For suddenly a grievous sickness took him,
That makes him gasp and stare and catch the air,
Blaspheming God and cursing men on earth.
Sometimes he talks as if Duke Humphreys ghost
Were by his side; sometime he calls the king,
And whispers to his pillow, as to him,
The secrets of his overcharged soul;
And I am sent to tell his majesty
That even now he cries aloud for him.
Go tell this heavy message to the king.
Exit VAUX
Ay me! what is this world! what news are these!
But wherefore grieve I at an hours poor loss,
Omitting Suffolks exile, my souls treasure?
Why only, Suffolk, mourn I not for thee,
And with the southern clouds contend in tears,
Theirs for the earths increase, mine for my sorrows?
Now get thee hence: the king, thou knowst, is coming;
If thou be found by me, thou art but dead.
If I depart from thee, I cannot live;
And in thy sight to die, what were it else
But like a pleasant slumber in thy lap?
Here could I breathe my soul into the air,
As mild and gentle as the cradle-babe
Dying with mothers dug between its lips:
Where, from thy sight, I should be raging mad,
And cry out for thee to close up mine eyes,
To have thee with thy lips to stop my mouth;
So shouldst thou either turn my flying soul,
Or I should breathe it so into thy body,
And then it lived in sweet Elysium.
To die by thee were but to die in jest;
From thee to die were torture more than death:
O, let me stay, befall what may befall!
Away! though parting be a fretful corrosive,
It is applied to a deathful wound.
To France, sweet Suffolk: let me hear from thee;
For wheresoeer thou art in this worlds globe,
Ill have an Iris that shall find thee out.
I go.
And take my heart with thee.
A jewel, lockd into the wofullst cask
That ever did contain a thing of worth.
Even as a splitted bark, so sunder we
This way fall I to death.
This way for me.
Exeunt severally
SCENE III. A bedchamber.
Enter the KING, SALISBURY, WARWICK, to the CARDINAL in bed
How fares my lord? speak, Beaufort, to
thy sovereign.
If thou best death, Ill give thee Englands treasure,
Enough to purchase such another island,
So thou wilt let me live, and feel no pain.
Ah, what a sign it is of evil life,
Where deaths approach is seen so terrible!
Beaufort, it is thy sovereign speaks to thee.
Bring me unto my trial when you will.
Died he not in his bed? where should he die?
Can I make men live, whether they will or no?
O, torture me no more! I will confess.
Alive again? then show me where he is:
Ill give a thousand pound to look upon him.
He hath no eyes, the dust hath blinded them.
Comb down his hair; look, look! it stands upright,
Like lime-twigs set to catch my winged soul.
Give me some drink; and bid the apothecary
Bring the strong poison that I bought of him.
O thou eternal Mover of the heavens.
Look with a gentle eye upon this wretch!
O, beat away the busy meddling fiend
That lays strong siege unto this wretchs soul.
And from his bosom purge this black despair!
See, how the pangs of death do make him grin!
Disturb him not; let him pass peaceably.
Peace to his soul, if Gods good pleasure be!
Lord cardinal, if thou thinkst on heavens bliss,
Hold up thy hand, make signal of thy hope.
He dies, and makes no sign. O God, forgive him!
So bad a death argues a monstrous life.
Forbear to judge, for we are sinners all.
Close up his eyes and draw the curtain close;
And let us all to meditation.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. The coast of Kent.
Alarum. Fight at sea. Ordnance goes off. Enter a  Captain, a Master, a Masters-mate, WALTER WHITMORE, and others; with them SUFFOLK, and others, prisoners
The gaudy, blabbing and remorseful day
Is crept into the bosom of the sea;
And now loud-howling wolves arouse the jades
That drag the tragic melancholy night;
Who, with their drowsy, slow and flagging wings,
Clip dead mens graves and from their misty jaws
Breathe foul contagious darkness in the air.
Therefore bring forth the soldiers of our prize;
For, whilst our pinnace anchors in the Downs,
Here shall they make their ransom on the sand,
Or with their blood stain this discolourd shore.
Master, this prisoner freely give I thee;
And thou that art his mate, make boot of this;
The other, Walter Whitmore, is thy share.
What is my ransom, master? let me know.
A thousand crowns, or else lay down your head.
Masters-MateAnd so much shall you give, or off goes yours.
What, think you much to pay two thousand crowns,
And bear the name and port of gentlemen?
Cut both the villains throats; for die you shall:
The lives of those which we have lost in fight
Be counterpoised with such a petty sum!
Ill give it, sir; and therefore spare my life.
And so will I and write home for it straight.
I lost mine eye in laying the prize aboard,
And therefore to revenge it, shalt thou die;
To SUFFOLK
And so should these, if I might have my will.
Be not so rash; take ransom, let him live.
Look on my George; I am a gentleman:
Rate me at what thou wilt, thou shalt be paid.
And so am I; my name is Walter Whitmore.
How now! why startst thou? what, doth
death affright?
Thy name affrights me, in whose sound is death.
A cunning man did calculate my birth
And told me that by water I should die:
Yet let not this make thee be bloody-minded;
Thy name is Gaultier, being rightly sounded.
Gaultier or Walter, which it is, I care not:
Never yet did base dishonour blur our name,
But with our sword we wiped away the blot;
Therefore, when merchant-like I sell revenge,
Broke be my sword, my arms torn and defaced,
And I proclaimd a coward through the world!
Stay, Whitmore; for thy prisoner is a prince,
The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Pole.
The Duke of Suffolk muffled up in rags!
Ay, but these rags are no part of the duke:
Jove sometimes went disguised, and why not I?
But Jove was never slain, as thou shalt be.
Obscure and lowly swain, King Henrys blood,
The honourable blood of Lancaster,
Must not be shed by such a jaded groom.
Hast thou not kissd thy hand and held my stirrup?
Bare-headed plodded by my foot-cloth mule
And thought thee happy when I shook my head?
How often hast thou waited at my cup,
Fed from my trencher, kneeld down at the board.
When I have feasted with Queen Margaret?
Remember it and let it make thee crest-falln,
Ay, and allay this thy abortive pride;
How in our voiding lobby hast thou stood
And duly waited for my coming forth?
This hand of mine hath writ in thy behalf,
And therefore shall it charm thy riotous tongue.
Speak, captain, shall I stab the forlorn swain?
First let my words stab him, as he hath me.
Base slave, thy words are blunt and so art thou.
Convey him hence and on our longboats side
Strike off his head.
Thou darest not, for thy own.
Yes, Pole.
Pole!
Pool! Sir Pool! lord!
Ay, kennel, puddle, sink; whose filth and dirt
Troubles the silver spring where England drinks.
Now will I dam up this thy yawning mouth
For swallowing the treasure of the realm:
Thy lips that kissd the queen shall sweep the ground;
And thou that smiledst at good Duke Humphreys death,
Against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain,
Who in contempt shall hiss at thee again:
And wedded be thou to the hags of hell,
For daring to affy a mighty lord
Unto the daughter of a worthless king,
Having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem.
By devilish policy art thou grown great,
And, like ambitious Sylla, overgorged
With gobbets of thy mothers bleeding heart.
By thee Anjou and Maine were sold to France,
The false revolting Normans thorough thee
Disdain to call us lord, and Picardy
Hath slain their governors, surprised our forts,
And sent the ragged soldiers wounded home.
The princely Warwick, and the Nevils all,
Whose dreadful swords were never drawn in vain,
As hating thee, are rising up in arms:
And now the house of York, thrust from the crown
By shameful murder of a guiltless king
And lofty proud encroaching tyranny,
Burns with revenging fire; whose hopeful colours
Advance our half-faced sun, striving to shine,
Under the which is writ Invitis nubibus.
The commons here in Kent are up in arms:
And, to conclude, reproach and beggary
Is crept into the palace of our king.
And all by thee. Away! convey him hence.
O that I were a god, to shoot forth thunder
Upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges!
Small things make base men proud: this villain here,
Being captain of a pinnace, threatens more
Than Bargulus the strong Illyrian pirate.
Drones suck not eagles blood but rob beehives:
It is impossible that I should die
By such a lowly vassal as thyself.
Thy words move rage and not remorse in me:
I go of message from the queen to France;
I charge thee waft me safely cross the Channel.
Walter,--
Come, Suffolk, I must waft thee to thy death.
Gelidus timor occupat artus it is thee I fear.
Thou shalt have cause to fear before I leave thee.
What, are ye daunted now? now will ye stoop?
My gracious lord, entreat him, speak him fair.
Suffolks imperial tongue is stern and rough,
Used to command, untaught to plead for favour.
Far be it we should honour such as these
With humble suit: no, rather let my head
Stoop to the block than these knees bow to any
Save to the God of heaven and to my king;
And sooner dance upon a bloody pole
Than stand uncoverd to the vulgar groom.
True nobility is exempt from fear:
More can I bear than you dare execute.
Hale him away, and let him talk no more.
Come, soldiers, show what cruelty ye can,
That this my death may never be forgot!
Great men oft die by vile bezonians:
A Roman sworder and banditto slave
Murderd sweet Tully; Brutus bastard hand
Stabbd Julius Caesar; savage islanders
Pompey the Great; and Suffolk dies by pirates.
Exeunt Whitmore and others with Suffolk
And as for these whose ransom we have set,
It is our pleasure one of them depart;
Therefore come you with us and let him go.
Exeunt all but the First Gentleman
Re-enter WHITMORE with SUFFOLKs body
There let his head and lifeless body lie,
Until the queen his mistress bury it.
Exit
O barbarous and bloody spectacle!
His body will I bear unto the king:
If he revenge it not, yet will his friends;
So will the queen, that living held him dear.
Exit with the body
SCENE II. Blackheath.
Enter GEORGE BEVIS and JOHN HOLLAND
Come, and get thee a sword, though made of a lath;
they have been up these two days.
They have the more need to sleep now, then.
I tell thee, Jack Cade the clothier means to dress
the commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.
So he had need, for tis threadbare. Well, I say it
was never merry world in England since gentlemen came up.
O miserable age! virtue is not regarded in handicrafts-men.
The nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.
Nay, more, the kings council are no good workmen.
True; and yet it is said, labour in thy vocation;
which is as much to say as, let the magistrates be
labouring men; and therefore should we be
magistrates.
Thou hast hit it; for theres no better sign of a
brave mind than a hard hand.
I see them! I see them! theres Bests son, the
tanner of Wingham,--
He shall have the skin of our enemies, to make
dogs-leather of.
And Dick the Butcher,--
Then is sin struck down like an ox, and iniquitys
throat cut like a calf.
And Smith the weaver,--
Argo, their thread of life is spun.
Come, come, lets fall in with them.
Drum. Enter CADE, DICK the Butcher, SMITH the Weaver, and a Sawyer, with infinite numbers
We John Cade, so termed of our supposed father,--
[Aside]  Or rather, of stealing a cade of herrings.
For our enemies shall fall before us, inspired with
the spirit of putting down kings and princes,
--Command silence.
Silence!
My father was a Mortimer,--
[Aside]  He was an honest man, and a good
bricklayer.
My mother a Plantagenet,--
[Aside]  I knew her well; she was a midwife.
My wife descended of the Lacies,--
[Aside]  She was, indeed, a pedlers daughter, and
sold many laces.
[Aside]  But now of late, notable to travel with her
furred pack, she washes bucks here at home.
Therefore am I of an honourable house.
[Aside]  Ay, by my faith, the field is honourable;
and there was he borne, under a hedge, for his
father had never a house but the cage.
Valiant I am.
[Aside]  A must needs; for beggary is valiant.
I am able to endure much.
[Aside]  No question of that; for I have seen him
whipped three market-days together.
I fear neither sword nor fire.
[Aside]  He need not fear the sword; for his coat is of proof.
[Aside]  But methinks he should stand in fear of
fire, being burnt i the hand for stealing of sheep.
Be brave, then; for your captain is brave, and vows
reformation. There shall be in England seven
halfpenny loaves sold for a penny: the three-hooped
pot; shall have ten hoops and I will make it felony
to drink small beer: all the realm shall be in
common; and in Cheapside shall my palfrey go to
grass: and when I am king, as king I will be,--
God save your majesty!
I thank you, good people: there shall be no money;
all shall eat and drink on my score; and I will
apparel them all in one livery, that they may agree
like brothers and worship me their lord.
The first thing we do, lets kill all the lawyers.
Nay, that I mean to do. Is not this a lamentable
thing, that of the skin of an innocent lamb should
be made parchment? that parchment, being scribbled
oer, should undo a man? Some say the bee stings:
but I say, tis the bees wax; for I did but seal
once to a thing, and I was never mine own man
since. How now! whos there?
Enter some, bringing forward the Clerk of Chatham
The clerk of Chatham: he can write and read and
cast accompt.
O monstrous!
We took him setting of boys copies.
Heres a villain!
Has a book in his pocket with red letters int.
Nay, then, he is a conjurer.
Nay, he can make obligations, and write court-hand.
I am sorry fort: the man is a proper man, of mine
honour; unless I find him guilty, he shall not die.
Come hither, sirrah, I must examine thee: what is thy name?
Emmanuel.
They use to write it on the top of letters: twill
go hard with you.
Let me alone. Dost thou use to write thy name? or
hast thou a mark to thyself, like an honest
plain-dealing man?
Sir, I thank God, I have been so well brought up
that I can write my name.
He hath confessed: away with him! hes a villain
and a traitor.
Away with him, I say! hang him with his pen and
ink-horn about his neck.
Exit one with the Clerk
Enter MICHAEL
Wheres our general?
Here I am, thou particular fellow.
Fly, fly, fly! Sir Humphrey Stafford and his
brother are hard by, with the kings forces.
Stand, villain, stand, or Ill fell thee down. He
shall be encountered with a man as good as himself:
he is but a knight, is a?
No.
To equal him, I will make myself a knight presently.
Kneels
Rise up Sir John Mortimer.
Rises
Now have at him!
Enter SIR HUMPHREY and WILLIAM STAFFORD, with drum and soldiers
Rebellious hinds, the filth and scum of Kent,
Markd for the gallows, lay your weapons down;
Home to your cottages, forsake this groom:
The king is merciful, if you revolt.
But angry, wrathful, and inclined to blood,
If you go forward; therefore yield, or die.
As for these silken-coated slaves, I pass not:
It is to you, good people, that I speak,
Over whom, in time to come, I hope to reign;
For I am rightful heir unto the crown.
Villain, thy father was a plasterer;
And thou thyself a shearman, art thou not?
And Adam was a gardener.
And what of that?
Marry, this: Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March.
Married the Duke of Clarence daughter, did he not?
Ay, sir.
By her he had two children at one birth.
Thats false.
Ay, theres the question; but I say, tis true:
The elder of them, being put to nurse,
Was by a beggar-woman stolen away;
And, ignorant of his birth and parentage,
Became a bricklayer when he came to age:
His son am I; deny it, if you can.
Nay, tis too true; therefore he shall be king.
Sir, he made a chimney in my fathers house, and
the bricks are alive at this day to testify it;
therefore deny it not.
And will you credit this base drudges words,
That speaks he knows not what?
Ay, marry, will we; therefore get ye gone.
Jack Cade, the Duke of York hath taught you this.
[Aside]  He lies, for I invented it myself.
Go to, sirrah, tell the king from me, that, for his
fathers sake, Henry the Fifth, in whose time boys
went to span-counter for French crowns, I am content
he shall reign; but Ill be protector over him.
And furthermore, well have the Lord Says head for
selling the dukedom of Maine.
And good reason; for thereby is England mained, and
fain to go with a staff, but that my puissance holds
it up. Fellow kings, I tell you that that Lord Say
hath gelded the commonwealth, and made it an eunuch:
and more than that, he can speak French; and
therefore he is a traitor.
O gross and miserable ignorance!
Nay, answer, if you can: the Frenchmen are our
enemies; go to, then, I ask but this: can he that
speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good
counsellor, or no?
No, no; and therefore well have his head.
Well, seeing gentle words will not prevail,
Assail them with the army of the king.
Herald, away; and throughout every town
Proclaim them traitors that are up with Cade;
That those which fly before the battle ends
May, even in their wives and childrens sight,
Be hangd up for example at their doors:
And you that be the kings friends, follow me.
Exeunt WILLIAM STAFFORD and SIR HUMPHREY, and soldiers
And you that love the commons, follow me.
Now show yourselves men; tis for liberty.
We will not leave one lord, one gentleman:
Spare none but such as go in clouted shoon;
For they are thrifty honest men, and such
As would, but that they dare not, take our parts.
They are all in order and march toward us.
But then are we in order when we are most
out of order. Come, march forward.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Another part of Blackheath.
Alarums to the fight, wherein SIR HUMPHREY and WILLIAM STAFFORD are slain. Enter CADE and the rest
Wheres Dick, the butcher of Ashford?
Here, sir.
They fell before thee like sheep and oxen, and thou
behavedst thyself as if thou hadst been in thine own
slaughter-house: therefore thus will I reward thee,
the Lent shall be as long again as it is; and thou
shalt have a licence to kill for a hundred lacking
one.
I desire no more.
And, to speak truth, thou deservest no less. This
monument of the victory will I bear;
Putting on SIR HUMPHREYS brigandine
and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse heels
till I do come to London, where we will have the
mayors sword borne before us.
If we mean to thrive and do good, break open the
gaols and let out the prisoners.
Fear not that, I warrant thee. Come, lets march
towards London.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. London. The palace.
Enter KING HENRY VI with a supplication, and the QUEEN with SUFFOLKS head, BUCKINGHAM and Lord SAY
Oft have I heard that grief softens the mind,
And makes it fearful and degenerate;
Think therefore on revenge and cease to weep.
But who can cease to weep and look on this?
Here may his head lie on my throbbing breast:
But wheres the body that I should embrace?
What answer makes your grace to the rebels
supplication?
Ill send some holy bishop to entreat;
For God forbid so many simple souls
Should perish by the sword! And I myself,
Rather than bloody war shall cut them short,
Will parley with Jack Cade their general:
But stay, Ill read it over once again.
Ah, barbarous villains! hath this lovely face
Ruled, like a wandering planet, over me,
And could it not enforce them to relent,
That were unworthy to behold the same?
Lord Say, Jack Cade hath sworn to have thy head.
Ay, but I hope your highness shall have his.
How now, madam!
Still lamenting and mourning for Suffolks death?
I fear me, love, if that I had been dead,
Thou wouldst not have mournd so much for me.
No, my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee.
Enter a Messenger
How now! what news? why comest thou in such haste?
The rebels are in Southwark; fly, my lord!
Jack Cade proclaims himself Lord Mortimer,
Descended from the Duke of Clarence house,
And calls your grace usurper openly
And vows to crown himself in Westminster.
His army is a ragged multitude
Of hinds and peasants, rude and merciless:
Sir Humphrey Stafford and h is brothers death
Hath given them heart and courage to proceed:
All scholars, lawyers, courtiers, gentlemen,
They call false caterpillars, and intend their death.
O graceless men! they know not what they do.
My gracious lord, return to Killingworth,
Until a power be raised to put them down.
Ah, were the Duke of Suffolk now alive,
These Kentish rebels would be soon appeased!
Lord Say, the traitors hate thee;
Therefore away with us to Killingworth.
So might your graces person be in danger.
The sight of me is odious in their eyes;
And therefore in this city will I stay
And live alone as secret as I may.
Enter another Messenger
Jack Cade hath gotten London bridge:
The citizens fly and forsake their houses:
The rascal people, thirsting after prey,
Join with the traitor, and they jointly swear
To spoil the city and your royal court.
Then linger not, my lord, away, take horse.
Come, Margaret; God, our hope, will succor us.
My hope is gone, now Suffolk is deceased.
Farewell, my lord: trust not the Kentish rebels.
Trust nobody, for fear you be betrayd.
The trust I have is in mine innocence,
And therefore am I bold and resolute.
Exeunt
SCENE V. London. The Tower.
Enter SCALES upon the Tower, walking. Then enter two or three Citizens below
How now! is Jack Cade slain?
No, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for they have
won the bridge, killing all those that withstand
them: the lord mayor craves aid of your honour from
the Tower, to defend the city from the rebels.
Such aid as I can spare you shall command;
But I am troubled here with them myself;
The rebels have assayd to win the Tower.
But get you to Smithfield, and gather head,
And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe;
Fight for your king, your country and your lives;
And so, farewell, for I must hence again.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. London. Cannon Street.
Enter CADE and the rest, and strikes his staff on London-stone
Now is Mortimer lord of this city. And here, sitting
upon London-stone, I charge and command that, of the
citys cost, the pissing-conduit run nothing but
claret wine this first year of our reign. And now
henceforward it shall be treason for any that calls
me other than Lord Mortimer.
Enter a Soldier, running
Jack Cade! Jack Cade!
Knock him down there.
They kill him
If this fellow be wise, hell never call ye Jack
Cade more: I think he hath a very fair warning.
My lord, theres an army gathered together in
Smithfield.
Come, then, lets go fight with them; but first, go
and set London bridge on fire; and, if you can, burn
down the Tower too. Come, lets away.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. London. Smithfield.
Alarums. MATTHEW GOFFE is slain, and all the rest. Then enter CADE, with his company.
So, sirs: now go some and pull down the Savoy;
others to the inns of court; down with them all.
I have a suit unto your lordship.
Be it a lordship, thou shalt have it for that word.
Only that the laws of England may come out of your mouth.
[Aside]  Mass, twill be sore law, then; for he was
thrust in the mouth with a spear, and tis not whole
yet.
[Aside]  Nay, John, it will be stinking law for his
breath stinks with eating toasted cheese.
I have thought upon it, it shall be so. Away, burn
all the records of the realm: my mouth shall be
the parliament of England.
[Aside]  Then we are like to have biting statutes,
unless his teeth be pulled out.
And henceforward all things shall be in common.
Enter a Messenger
My lord, a prize, a prize! heres the Lord Say,
which sold the towns in France; he that made us pay
one and twenty fifteens, and one shilling to the
pound, the last subsidy.
Enter BEVIS, with Lord SAY
Well, he shall be beheaded for it ten times. Ah,
thou say, thou serge, nay, thou buckram lord! now
art thou within point-blank of our jurisdiction
regal. What canst thou answer to my majesty for
giving up of Normandy unto Mounsieur Basimecu, the
dauphin of France? Be it known unto thee by these
presence, even the presence of Lord Mortimer, that I
am the besom that must sweep the court clean of such
filth as thou art. Thou hast most traitorously
corrupted the youth of the realm in erecting a
grammar school; and whereas, before, our forefathers
had no other books but the score and the tally, thou
hast caused printing to be used, and, contrary to
the king, his crown and dignity, thou hast built a
paper-mill. It will be proved to thy face that thou
hast men about thee that usually talk of a noun and
a verb, and such abominable words as no Christian
ear can endure to hear. Thou hast appointed
justices of peace, to call poor men before them
about matters they were not able to answer.
Moreover, thou hast put them in prison; and because
they could not read, thou hast hanged them; when,
indeed, only for that cause they have been most
worthy to live. Thou dost ride in a foot-cloth, dost thou not?
What of that?
Marry, thou oughtest not to let thy horse wear a
cloak, when honester men than thou go in their hose
and doublets.
And work in their shirt too; as myself, for example,
that am a butcher.
You men of Kent,--
What say you of Kent?
Nothing but this; tis bona terra, mala gens.
Away with him, away with him! he speaks Latin.
Hear me but speak, and bear me where you will.
Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar writ,
Is termd the civilst place of this isle:
Sweet is the country, because full of riches;
The people liberal, valiant, active, wealthy;
Which makes me hope you are not void of pity.
I sold not Maine, I lost not Normandy,
Yet, to recover them, would lose my life.
Justice with favour have I always done;
Prayers and tears have moved me, gifts could never.
When have I aught exacted at your hands,
But to maintain the king, the realm and you?
Large gifts have I bestowd on learned clerks,
Because my book preferrd me to the king,
And seeing ignorance is the curse of God,
Knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven,
Unless you be possessd with devilish spirits,
You cannot but forbear to murder me:
This tongue hath parleyd unto foreign kings
For your behoof,--
Tut, when struckst thou one blow in the field?
Great men have reaching hands: oft have I struck
Those that I never saw and struck them dead.
O monstrous coward! what, to come behind folks?
These cheeks are pale for watching for your good.
Give him a box o the ear and that will make em red again.
Long sitting to determine poor mens causes
Hath made me full of sickness and diseases.
Ye shall have a hempen caudle, then, and the help of hatchet.
Why dost thou quiver, man?
The palsy, and not fear, provokes me.
Nay, he nods at us, as who should say, Ill be even
with you: Ill see if his head will stand steadier
on a pole, or no. Take him away, and behead him.
Tell me wherein have I offended most?
Have I affected wealth or honour? speak.
Are my chests filld up with extorted gold?
Is my apparel sumptuous to behold?
Whom have I injured, that ye seek my death?
These hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding,
This breast from harbouring foul deceitful thoughts.
O, let me live!
[Aside]  I feel remorse in myself with his words;
but Ill bridle it: he shall die, an it be but for
pleading so well for his life. Away with him! he
has a familiar under his tongue; he speaks not o
Gods name. Go, take him away, I say, and strike
off his head presently; and then break into his
son-in-laws house, Sir James Cromer, and strike off
his head, and bring them both upon two poles hither.
It shall be done.
Ah, countrymen! if when you make your prayers,
God should be so obdurate as yourselves,
How would it fare with your departed souls?
And therefore yet relent, and save my life.
Away with him! and do as I command ye.
Exeunt some with Lord SAY
The proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head
on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute; there
shall not a maid be married, but she shall pay to me
her maidenhead ere they have it: men shall hold of
me in capite; and we charge and command that their
wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue can tell.
My lord, when shall we go to Cheapside and take up
commodities upon our bills?
Marry, presently.
O, brave!
Re-enter one with the heads
But is not this braver? Let them kiss one another,
for they loved well when they were alive. Now part
them again, lest they consult about the giving up of
some more towns in France. Soldiers, defer the
spoil of the city until night: for with these borne
before us, instead of maces, will we ride through
the streets, and at every corner have them kiss. Away!
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. Southwark.
Alarum and retreat. Enter CADE and all his rabblement
Up Fish Street! down Saint Magnus Corner! Kill
and knock down! throw them into Thames!
Sound a parley
What noise is this I hear? Dare any be so bold to
sound retreat or parley, when I command them kill?
Enter BUCKINGHAM and CLIFFORD, attended
Ay, here they be that dare and will disturb thee:
Know, Cade, we come ambassadors from the king
Unto the commons whom thou hast misled;
And here pronounce free pardon to them all
That will forsake thee and go home in peace.
What say ye, countrymen? will ye relent,
And yield to mercy whilst tis offerd you;
Or let a rebel lead you to your deaths?
Who loves the king and will embrace his pardon,
Fling up his cap, and say God save his majesty!
Who hateth him and honours not his father,
Henry the Fifth, that made all France to quake,
Shake he his weapon at us and pass by.
God save the king! God save the king!
What, Buckingham and Clifford, are ye so brave? And
you, base peasants, do ye believe him? will you
needs be hanged with your pardons about your necks?
Hath my sword therefore broke through London gates,
that you should leave me at the White Hart in
Southwark? I thought ye would never have given out
these arms till you had recovered your ancient
freedom: but you are all recreants and dastards,
and delight to live in slavery to the nobility. Let
them break your backs with burthens, take your
houses over your heads, ravish your wives and
daughters before your faces: for me, I will make
shift for one; and so, Gods curse light upon you
all!
Well follow Cade, well follow Cade!
Is Cade the son of Henry the Fifth,
That thus you do exclaim youll go with him?
Will he conduct you through the heart of France,
And make the meanest of you earls and dukes?
Alas, he hath no home, no place to fly to;
Nor knows he how to live but by the spoil,
Unless by robbing of your friends and us.
Weret not a shame, that whilst you live at jar,
The fearful French, whom you late vanquished,
Should make a start oer seas and vanquish you?
Methinks already in this civil broil
I see them lording it in London streets,
Crying Villiago! unto all they meet.
Better ten thousand base-born Cades miscarry
Than you should stoop unto a Frenchmans mercy.
To France, to France, and get what you have lost;
Spare England, for it is your native coast;
Henry hath money, you are strong and manly;
God on our side, doubt not of victory.
A Clifford! a Clifford! well follow the king and Clifford.
Was ever feather so lightly blown to and fro as this
multitude? The name of Henry the Fifth hales them
to an hundred mischiefs, and makes them leave me
desolate. I see them lay their heads together to
surprise me. My sword make way for me, for here is
no staying. In despite of the devils and hell, have
through the very middest of you? and heavens and
honour be witness, that no want of resolution in me.
but only my followers base and ignominious
treasons, makes me betake me to my heels.
Exit
What, is he fled? Go some, and follow him;
And he that brings his head unto the king
Shall have a thousand crowns for his reward.
Exeunt some of them
Follow me, soldiers: well devise a mean
To reconcile you all unto the king.
Exeunt
SCENE IX. Kenilworth Castle.
Sound Trumpets. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and SOMERSET, on the terrace
Was ever king that joyd an earthly throne,
