And could command no more content than I?
No sooner was I crept out of my cradle
But I was made a king, at nine months old.
Was never subject longd to be a king
As I do long and wish to be a subject.
Enter BUCKINGHAM and CLIFFORD
Health and glad tidings to your majesty!
Why, Buckingham, is the traitor Cade surprised?
Or is he but retired to make him strong?
Enter below, multitudes, with halters about their necks
He is fled, my lord, and all his powers do yield;
And humbly thus, with halters on their necks,
Expect your highness doom of life or death.
Then, heaven, set ope thy everlasting gates,
To entertain my vows of thanks and praise!
Soldiers, this day have you redeemed your lives,
And showd how well you love your prince and country:
Continue still in this so good a mind,
And Henry, though he be infortunate,
Assure yourselves, will never be unkind:
And so, with thanks and pardon to you all,
I do dismiss you to your several countries.
God save the king! God save the king!
Enter a Messenger
Please it your grace to be advertised
The Duke of York is newly come from Ireland,
And with a puissant and a mighty power
Of gallowglasses and stout kerns
Is marching hitherward in proud array,
And still proclaimeth, as he comes along,
His arms are only to remove from thee
The Duke of Somerset, whom he terms traitor.
Thus stands my state, twixt Cade and York distressd.
Like to a ship that, having scaped a tempest,
Is straightway calmd and boarded with a pirate:
But now is Cade driven back, his men dispersed;
And now is York in arms to second him.
I pray thee, Buckingham, go and meet him,
And ask him whats the reason of these arms.
Tell him Ill send Duke Edmund to the Tower;
And, Somerset, well commit thee thither,
Until his army be dismissd from him.
My lord,
Ill yield myself to prison willingly,
Or unto death, to do my country good.
In any case, be not too rough in terms;
For he is fierce and cannot brook hard language.
I will, my lord; and doubt not so to deal
As all things shall redound unto your good.
Come, wife, lets in, and learn to govern better;
For yet may England curse my wretched reign.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE X. Kent. IDENs garden.
Enter CADE
Fie on ambition! fie on myself, that have a sword,
and yet am ready to famish! These five days have I
hid me in these woods and durst not peep out, for
all the country is laid for me; but now am I so
hungry that if I might have a lease of my life for a
thousand years I could stay no longer. Wherefore,
on a brick wall have I climbed into this garden, to
see if I can eat grass, or pick a sallet another
while, which is not amiss to cool a mans stomach
this hot weather. And I think this word sallet
was born to do me good: for many a time, but for a
sallet, my brainpan had been cleft with a brown
bill; and many a time, when I have been dry and
bravely marching, it hath served me instead of a
quart pot to drink in; and now the word sallet
must serve me to feed on.
Enter IDEN
Lord, who would live turmoiled in the court,
And may enjoy such quiet walks as these?
This small inheritance my father left me
Contenteth me, and worth a monarchy.
I seek not to wax great by others waning,
Or gather wealth, I care not, with what envy:
Sufficeth that I have maintains my state
And sends the poor well pleased from my gate.
Heres the lord of the soil come to seize me for a
stray, for entering his fee-simple without leave.
Ah, villain, thou wilt betray me, and get a thousand
crowns of the king carrying my head to him: but
Ill make thee eat iron like an ostrich, and swallow
my sword like a great pin, ere thou and I part.
Why, rude companion, whatsoeer thou be,
I know thee not; why, then, should I betray thee?
Ist not enough to break into my garden,
And, like a thief, to come to rob my grounds,
Climbing my walls in spite of me the owner,
But thou wilt brave me with these saucy terms?
Brave thee! ay, by the best blood that ever was
broached, and beard thee too. Look on me well: I
have eat no meat these five days; yet, come thou and
thy five men, and if I do not leave you all as dead
as a doornail, I pray God I may never eat grass more.
Nay, it shall neer be said, while England stands,
That Alexander Iden, an esquire of Kent,
Took odds to combat a poor famishd man.
Oppose thy steadfast-gazing eyes to mine,
See if thou canst outface me with thy looks:
Set limb to limb, and thou art far the lesser;
Thy hand is but a finger to my fist,
Thy leg a stick compared with this truncheon;
My foot shall fight with all the strength thou hast;
And if mine arm be heaved in the air,
Thy grave is diggd already in the earth.
As for words, whose greatness answers words,
Let this my sword report what speech forbears.
By my valour, the most complete champion that ever I
heard! Steel, if thou turn the edge, or cut not out
the burly-boned clown in chines of beef ere thou
sleep in thy sheath, I beseech God on my knees thou
mayst be turned to hobnails.
Here they fight. CADE falls
O, I am slain! famine and no other hath slain me:
let ten thousand devils come against me, and give me
but the ten meals I have lost, and Ill defy them
all. Wither, garden; and be henceforth a
burying-place to all that do dwell in this house,
because the unconquered soul of Cade is fled.
Ist Cade that I have slain, that monstrous traitor?
Sword, I will hollow thee for this thy deed,
And hang thee oer my tomb when I am dead:
Neer shall this blood be wiped from thy point;
But thou shalt wear it as a heralds coat,
To emblaze the honour that thy master got.
Iden, farewell, and be proud of thy victory. Tell
Kent from me, she hath lost her best man, and exhort
all the world to be cowards; for I, that never
feared any, am vanquished by famine, not by valour.
Dies
How much thou wrongst me, heaven be my judge.
Die, damned wretch, the curse of her that bare thee;
And as I thrust thy body in with my sword,
So wish I, I might thrust thy soul to hell.
Hence will I drag thee headlong by the heels
Unto a dunghill which shall be thy grave,
And there cut off thy most ungracious head;
Which I will bear in triumph to the king,
Leaving thy trunk for crows to feed upon.
Exit
ACT V
SCENE I. Fields between Dartford and Blackheath.
Enter YORK, and his army of Irish, with drum and colours
From Ireland thus comes York to claim his right,
And pluck the crown from feeble Henrys head:
Ring, bells, aloud; burn, bonfires, clear and bright,
To entertain great Englands lawful king.
Ah! sancta majestas, who would not buy thee dear?
Let them obey that know not how to rule;
This hand was made to handle naught but gold.
I cannot give due action to my words,
Except a sword or sceptre balance it:
A sceptre shall it have, have I a soul,
On which Ill toss the flower-de-luce of France.
Enter BUCKINGHAM
Whom have we here? Buckingham, to disturb me?
The king hath sent him, sure: I must dissemble.
York, if thou meanest well, I greet thee well.
Humphrey of Buckingham, I accept thy greeting.
Art thou a messenger, or come of pleasure?
A messenger from Henry, our dread liege,
To know the reason of these arms in peace;
Or why thou, being a subject as I am,
Against thy oath and true allegiance sworn,
Should raise so great a power without his leave,
Or dare to bring thy force so near the court.
[Aside]  Scarce can I speak, my choler is so great:
O, I could hew up rocks and fight with flint,
I am so angry at these abject terms;
And now, like Ajax Telamonius,
On sheep or oxen could I spend my fury.
I am far better born than is the king,
More like a king, more kingly in my thoughts:
But I must make fair weather yet a while,
Till Henry be more weak and I more strong,--
Buckingham, I prithee, pardon me,
That I have given no answer all this while;
My mind was troubled with deep melancholy.
The cause why I have brought this army hither
Is to remove proud Somerset from the king,
Seditious to his grace and to the state.
That is too much presumption on thy part:
But if thy arms be to no other end,
The king hath yielded unto thy demand:
The Duke of Somerset is in the Tower.
Upon thine honour, is he prisoner?
Upon mine honour, he is prisoner.
Then, Buckingham, I do dismiss my powers.
Soldiers, I thank you all; disperse yourselves;
Meet me to-morrow in St. Georges field,
You shall have pay and every thing you wish.
And let my sovereign, virtuous Henry,
Command my eldest son, nay, all my sons,
As pledges of my fealty and love;
Ill send them all as willing as I live:
Lands, goods, horse, armour, any thing I have,
Is his to use, so Somerset may die.
York, I commend this kind submission:
We twain will go into his highness tent.
Enter KING HENRY VI and Attendants
Buckingham, doth York intend no harm to us,
That thus he marcheth with thee arm in arm?
In all submission and humility
York doth present himself unto your highness.
Then what intends these forces thou dost bring?
To heave the traitor Somerset from hence,
And fight against that monstrous rebel Cade,
Who since I heard to be discomfited.
Enter IDEN, with CADES head
If one so rude and of so mean condition
May pass into the presence of a king,
Lo, I present your grace a traitors head,
The head of Cade, whom I in combat slew.
The head of Cade! Great God, how just art Thou!
O, let me view his visage, being dead,
That living wrought me such exceeding trouble.
Tell me, my friend, art thou the man that slew him?
I was, ant like your majesty.
How art thou calld? and what is thy degree?
Alexander Iden, thats my name;
A poor esquire of Kent, that loves his king.
So please it you, my lord, twere not amiss
He were created knight for his good service.
Iden, kneel down.
He kneels
Rise up a knight.
We give thee for reward a thousand marks,
And will that thou henceforth attend on us.
May Iden live to merit such a bounty.
And never live but true unto his liege!
Rises
Enter QUEEN MARGARET and SOMERSET
See, Buckingham, Somerset comes with the queen:
Go, bid her hide him quickly from the duke.
For thousand Yorks he shall not hide his head,
But boldly stand and front him to his face.
How now! is Somerset at liberty?
Then, York, unloose thy long-imprisond thoughts,
And let thy tongue be equal with thy heart.
Shall I endure the sight of Somerset?
False king! why hast thou broken faith with me,
Knowing how hardly I can brook abuse?
King did I call thee? no, thou art not king,
Not fit to govern and rule multitudes,
Which darest not, no, nor canst not rule a traitor.
That head of thine doth not become a crown;
Thy hand is made to grasp a palmers staff,
And not to grace an awful princely sceptre.
That gold must round engirt these brows of mine,
Whose smile and frown, like to Achilles spear,
Is able with the change to kill and cure.
Here is a hand to hold a sceptre up
And with the same to act controlling laws.
Give place: by heaven, thou shalt rule no more
Oer him whom heaven created for thy ruler.
O monstrous traitor! I arrest thee, York,
Of capital treason gainst the king and crown;
Obey, audacious traitor; kneel for grace.
Wouldst have me kneel? first let me ask of these,
If they can brook I bow a knee to man.
Sirrah, call in my sons to be my bail;
Exit Attendant
I know, ere they will have me go to ward,
Theyll pawn their swords for my enfranchisement.
Call hither Clifford! bid him come amain,
To say if that the bastard boys of York
Shall be the surety for their traitor father.
Exit BUCKINGHAM
O blood-besotted Neapolitan,
Outcast of Naples, Englands bloody scourge!
The sons of York, thy betters in their birth,
Shall be their fathers bail; and bane to those
That for my surety will refuse the boys!
Enter EDWARD and RICHARD
See where they come: Ill warrant theyll
make it good.
Enter CLIFFORD and YOUNG CLIFFORD
And here comes Clifford to deny their bail.
Health and all happiness to my lord the king!
Kneels
I thank thee, Clifford: say, what news with thee?
Nay, do not fright us with an angry look;
We are thy sovereign, Clifford, kneel again;
For thy mistaking so, we pardon thee.
This is my king, York, I do not mistake;
But thou mistakest me much to think I do:
To Bedlam with him! is the man grown mad?
Ay, Clifford; a bedlam and ambitious humour
Makes him oppose himself against his king.
He is a traitor; let him to the Tower,
And chop away that factious pate of his.
He is arrested, but will not obey;
His sons, he says, shall give their words for him.
Will you not, sons?
Ay, noble father, if our words will serve.
And if words will not, then our weapons shall.
Why, what a brood of traitors have we here!
Look in a glass, and call thy image so:
I am thy king, and thou a false-heart traitor.
Call hither to the stake my two brave bears,
That with the very shaking of their chains
They may astonish these fell-lurking curs:
Bid Salisbury and Warwick come to me.
Enter the WARWICK and SALISBURY
Are these thy bears? well bait thy bears to death.
And manacle the bear-ward in their chains,
If thou darest bring them to the baiting place.
Oft have I seen a hot oerweening cur
Run back and bite, because he was withheld;
Who, being sufferd with the bears fell paw,
Hath clappd his tail between his legs and cried:
And such a piece of service will you do,
If you oppose yourselves to match Lord Warwick.
Hence, heap of wrath, foul indigested lump,
As crooked in thy manners as thy shape!
Nay, we shall heat you thoroughly anon.
Take heed, lest by your heat you burn yourselves.
Why, Warwick, hath thy knee forgot to bow?
Old Salisbury, shame to thy silver hair,
Thou mad misleader of thy brain-sick son!
What, wilt thou on thy death-bed play the ruffian,
And seek for sorrow with thy spectacles?
O, where is faith? O, where is loyalty?
If it be banishd from the frosty head,
Where shall it find a harbour in the earth?
Wilt thou go dig a grave to find out war,
And shame thine honourable age with blood?
Why art thou old, and wantst experience?
Or wherefore dost abuse it, if thou hast it?
For shame! in duty bend thy knee to me
That bows unto the grave with mickle age.
My lord, I have considerd with myself
The title of this most renowned duke;
And in my conscience do repute his grace
The rightful heir to Englands royal seat.
Hast thou not sworn allegiance unto me?
I have.
Canst thou dispense with heaven for such an oath?
It is great sin to swear unto a sin,
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.
Who can be bound by any solemn vow
To do a murderous deed, to rob a man,
To force a spotless virgins chastity,
To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
To wring the widow from her customd right,
And have no other reason for this wrong
But that he was bound by a solemn oath?
A subtle traitor needs no sophister.
Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.
Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou hast,
I am resolved for death or dignity.
The first I warrant thee, if dreams prove true.
You were best to go to bed and dream again,
To keep thee from the tempest of the field.
I am resolved to bear a greater storm
Than any thou canst conjure up to-day;
And that Ill write upon thy burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy household badge.
Now, by my fathers badge, old Nevils crest,
The rampant bear chaind to the ragged staff,
This day Ill wear aloft my burgonet,
As on a mountain top the cedar shows
That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm,
Even to affright thee with the view thereof.
And from thy burgonet Ill rend thy bear
And tread it under foot with all contempt,
Despite the bear-ward that protects the bear.
And so to arms, victorious father,
To quell the rebels and their complices.
Fie! charity, for shame! speak not in spite,
For you shall sup with Jesu Christ to-night.
Foul stigmatic, thats more than thou canst tell.
If not in heaven, youll surely sup in hell.
Exeunt severally
SCENE II. Saint Albans.
Alarums to the battle. Enter WARWICK
Clifford of Cumberland, tis Warwick calls:
And if thou dost not hide thee from the bear,
Now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum
And dead mens cries do fill the empty air,
Clifford, I say, come forth and fight with me:
Proud northern lord, Clifford of Cumberland,
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.
Enter YORK
How now, my noble lord? what, all afoot?
The deadly-handed Clifford slew my steed,
But match to match I have encounterd him
And made a prey for carrion kites and crows
Even of the bonny beast he loved so well.
Enter CLIFFORD
Of one or both of us the time is come.
Hold, Warwick, seek thee out some other chase,
For I myself must hunt this deer to death.
Then, nobly, York; tis for a crown thou fightst.
As I intend, Clifford, to thrive to-day,
It grieves my soul to leave thee unassaild.
Exit
What seest thou in me, York? why dost thou pause?
With thy brave bearing should I be in love,
But that thou art so fast mine enemy.
Nor should thy prowess want praise and esteem,
But that tis shown ignobly and in treason.
So let it help me now against thy sword
As I in justice and true right express it.
My soul and body on the action both!
A dreadful lay! Address thee instantly.
They fight, and CLIFFORD falls
La fin couronne les oeuvres.
Dies
Thus war hath given thee peace, for thou art still.
Peace with his soul, heaven, if it be thy will!
Exit
Enter YOUNG CLIFFORD
Shame and confusion! all is on the rout;
Fear frames disorder, and disorder wounds
Where it should guard. O war, thou son of hell,
Whom angry heavens do make their minister
Throw in the frozen bosoms of our part
Hot coals of vengeance! Let no soldier fly.
He that is truly dedicate to war
Hath no self-love, nor he that loves himself
Hath not essentially but by circumstance
The name of valour.
Seeing his dead father
O, let the vile world end,
And the premised flames of the last day
Knit earth and heaven together!
Now let the general trumpet blow his blast,
Particularities and petty sounds
To cease! Wast thou ordaind, dear father,
To lose thy youth in peace, and to achieve
The silver livery of advised age,
And, in thy reverence and thy chair-days, thus
To die in ruffian battle? Even at this sight
My heart is turnd to stone: and while tis mine,
It shall be stony. York not our old men spares;
No more will I their babes: tears virginal
Shall be to me even as the dew to fire,
And beauty that the tyrant oft reclaims
Shall to my flaming wrath be oil and flax.
Henceforth I will not have to do with pity:
Meet I an infant of the house of York,
Into as many gobbets will I cut it
As wild Medea young Absyrtus did:
In cruelty will I seek out my fame.
Come, thou new ruin of old Cliffords house:
As did AEneas old Anchises bear,
So bear I thee upon my manly shoulders;
But then AEneas bare a living load,
Nothing so heavy as these woes of mine.
Exit, bearing off his father
Enter RICHARD and SOMERSET to fight. SOMERSET is killed
So, lie thou there;
For underneath an alehouse paltry sign,
The Castle in Saint Albans, Somerset
Hath made the wizard famous in his death.
Sword, hold thy temper; heart, be wrathful still:
Priests pray for enemies, but princes kill.
Exit
Fight: excursions. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET, and others
Away, my lord! you are slow; for shame, away!
Can we outrun the heavens? good Margaret, stay.
What are you made of? youll nor fight nor fly:
Now is it manhood, wisdom and defence,
To give the enemy way, and to secure us
By what we can, which can no more but fly.
Alarum afar off
If you be taen, we then should see the bottom
Of all our fortunes: but if we haply scape,
As well we may, if not through your neglect,
We shall to London get, where you are loved
And where this breach now in our fortunes made
May readily be stoppd.
Re-enter YOUNG CLIFFORD
But that my hearts on future mischief set,
I would speak blasphemy ere bid you fly:
But fly you must; uncurable discomfit
Reigns in the hearts of all our present parts.
Away, for your relief! and we will live
To see their day and them our fortune give:
Away, my lord, away!
Exeunt
SCENE III. Fields near St. Albans.
Alarum. Retreat. Enter YORK, RICHARD, WARWICK, and Soldiers, with drum and colours
Of Salisbury, who can report of him,
That winter lion, who in rage forgets
Aged contusions and all brush of time,
And, like a gallant in the brow of youth,
Repairs him with occasion? This happy day
Is not itself, nor have we won one foot,
If Salisbury be lost.
My noble father,
Three times to-day I holp him to his horse,
Three times bestrid him; thrice I led him off,
Persuaded him from any further act:
But still, where danger was, still there I met him;
And like rich hangings in a homely house,
So was his will in his old feeble body.
But, noble as he is, look where he comes.
Enter SALISBURY
Now, by my sword, well hast thou fought to-day;
By the mass, so did we all. I thank you, Richard:
God knows how long it is I have to live;
And it hath pleased him that three times to-day
You have defended me from imminent death.
Well, lords, we have not got that which we have:
Tis not enough our foes are this time fled,
Being opposites of such repairing nature.
I know our safety is to follow them;
For, as I hear, the king is fled to London,
To call a present court of parliament.
Let us pursue him ere the writs go forth.
What says Lord Warwick? shall we after them?
After them! nay, before them, if we can.
Now, by my faith, lords, twas a glorious day:
Saint Albans battle won by famous York
Shall be eternized in all age to come.
Sound drums and trumpets, and to London all:
And more such days as these to us befall!
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. London. The Parliament-house.
Alarum. Enter YORK, EDWARD, RICHARD, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, WARWICK, and Soldiers
I wonder how the king escaped our hands.
While we pursued the horsemen of the north,
He slily stole away and left his men:
Whereat the great Lord of Northumberland,
Whose warlike ears could never brook retreat,
Cheerd up the drooping army; and himself,
Lord Clifford and Lord Stafford, all abreast,
Charged our main battles front, and breaking in
Were by the swords of common soldiers slain.
Lord Staffords father, Duke of Buckingham,
Is either slain or wounded dangerously;
I cleft his beaver with a downright blow:
That this is true, father, behold his blood.
And, brother, heres the Earl of Wiltshires blood,
Whom I encounterd as the battles joind.
Speak thou for me and tell them what I did.
Throwing down SOMERSETs head
Richard hath best deserved of all my sons.
But is your grace dead, my Lord of Somerset?
Such hope have all the line of John of Gaunt!
Thus do I hope to shake King Henrys head.
And so do I. Victorious Prince of York,
Before I see thee seated in that throne
Which now the house of Lancaster usurps,
I vow by heaven these eyes shall never close.
This is the palace of the fearful king,
And this the regal seat: possess it, York;
For this is thine and not King Henrys heirs
Assist me, then, sweet Warwick, and I will;
For hither we have broken in by force.
Well all assist you; he that flies shall die.
Thanks, gentle Norfolk: stay by me, my lords;
And, soldiers, stay and lodge by me this night.
They go up
And when the king comes, offer no violence,
Unless he seek to thrust you out perforce.
The queen this day here holds her parliament,
But little thinks we shall be of her council:
By words or blows here let us win our right.
Armd as we are, lets stay within this house.
The bloody parliament shall this be calld,
Unless Plantagenet, Duke of York, be king,
And bashful Henry deposed, whose cowardice
Hath made us by-words to our enemies.
Then leave me not, my lords; be resolute;
I mean to take possession of my right.
Neither the king, nor he that loves him best,
The proudest he that holds up Lancaster,
Dares stir a wing, if Warwick shake his bells.
Ill plant Plantagenet, root him up who dares:
Resolve thee, Richard; claim the English crown.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, CLIFFORD, NORTHUMBERLAND, WESTMORELAND, EXETER, and the rest
My lords, look where the sturdy rebel sits,
Even in the chair of state: belike he means,
Backd by the power of Warwick, that false peer,
To aspire unto the crown and reign as king.
Earl of Northumberland, he slew thy father.
And thine, Lord Clifford; and you both have vowd revenge
On him, his sons, his favourites and his friends.
If I be not, heavens be revenged on me!
The hope thereof makes Clifford mourn in steel.
What, shall we suffer this? lets pluck him down:
My heart for anger burns; I cannot brook it.
Be patient, gentle Earl of Westmoreland.
Patience is for poltroons, such as he:
He durst not sit there, had your father lived.
My gracious lord, here in the parliament
Let us assail the family of York.
Well hast thou spoken, cousin: be it so.
Ah, know you not the city favours them,
And they have troops of soldiers at their beck?
But when the duke is slain, theyll quickly fly.
Far be the thought of this from Henrys heart,
To make a shambles of the parliament-house!
Cousin of Exeter, frowns, words and threats
Shall be the war that Henry means to use.
Thou factious Duke of York, descend my throne,
and kneel for grace and mercy at my feet;
I am thy sovereign.
I am thine.
For shame, come down: he made thee Duke of York.
Twas my inheritance, as the earldom was.
Thy father was a traitor to the crown.
Exeter, thou art a traitor to the crown
In following this usurping Henry.
Whom should he follow but his natural king?
True, Clifford; and thats Richard Duke of York.
And shall I stand, and thou sit in my throne?
It must and shall be so: content thyself.
Be Duke of Lancaster; let him be king.
He is both king and Duke of Lancaster;
And that the Lord of Westmoreland shall maintain.
And Warwick shall disprove it. You forget
That we are those which chased you from the field
And slew your fathers, and with colours spread
Marchd through the city to the palace gates.
Yes, Warwick, I remember it to my grief;
And, by his soul, thou and thy house shall rue it.
Plantagenet, of thee and these thy sons,
Thy kinsman and thy friends, Ill have more lives
Than drops of blood were in my fathers veins.
Urge it no more; lest that, instead of words,
I send thee, Warwick, such a messenger
As shall revenge his death before I stir.
Poor Clifford! how I scorn his worthless threats!
Will you we show our title to the crown?
If not, our swords shall plead it in the field.
What title hast thou, traitor, to the crown?
Thy father was, as thou art, Duke of York;
Thy grandfather, Roger Mortimer, Earl of March:
I am the son of Henry the Fifth,
Who made the Dauphin and the French to stoop
And seized upon their towns and provinces.
Talk not of France, sith thou hast lost it all.
The lord protector lost it, and not I:
When I was crownd I was but nine months old.
You are old enough now, and yet, methinks, you lose.
Father, tear the crown from the usurpers head.
Sweet father, do so; set it on your head.
Good brother, as thou lovest and honourest arms,
Lets fight it out and not stand cavilling thus.
Sound drums and trumpets, and the king will fly.
Sons, peace!
Peace, thou! and give King Henry leave to speak.
Plantagenet shall speak first: hear him, lords;
And be you silent and attentive too,
For he that interrupts him shall not live.
Thinkst thou that I will leave my kingly throne,
Wherein my grandsire and my father sat?
No: first shall war unpeople this my realm;
Ay, and their colours, often borne in France,
And now in England to our hearts great sorrow,
Shall be my winding-sheet. Why faint you, lords?
My titles good, and better far than his.
Prove it, Henry, and thou shalt be king.
Henry the Fourth by conquest got the crown.
Twas by rebellion against his king.
[Aside]  I know not what to say; my titles weak.--
Tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?
What then?
An if he may, then am I lawful king;
For Richard, in the view of many lords,
Resignd the crown to Henry the Fourth,
Whose heir my father was, and I am his.
He rose against him, being his sovereign,
And made him to resign his crown perforce.
Suppose, my lords, he did it unconstraind,
Think you twere prejudicial to his crown?
No; for he could not so resign his crown
But that the next heir should succeed and reign.
Art thou against us, Duke of Exeter?
His is the right, and therefore pardon me.
Why whisper you, my lords, and answer not?
My conscience tells me he is lawful king.
[Aside]  All will revolt from me, and turn to him.
Plantagenet, for all the claim thou layst,
Think not that Henry shall be so deposed.
Deposed he shall be, in despite of all.
Thou art deceived: tis not thy southern power,
Of Essex, Norfolk, Suffolk, nor of Kent,
Which makes thee thus presumptuous and proud,
Can set the duke up in despite of me.
King Henry, be thy title right or wrong,
Lord Clifford vows to fight in thy defence:
May that ground gape and swallow me alive,
Where I shall kneel to him that slew my father!
O Clifford, how thy words revive my heart!
Henry of Lancaster, resign thy crown.
What mutter you, or what conspire you, lords?
Do right unto this princely Duke of York,
Or I will fill the house with armed men,
And over the chair of state, where now he sits,
Write up his title with usurping blood.
He stamps with his foot and the soldiers show themselves
My Lord of Warwick, hear me but one word:
Let me for this my life-time reign as king.
Confirm the crown to me and to mine heirs,
And thou shalt reign in quiet while thou livest.
I am content: Richard Plantagenet,
Enjoy the kingdom after my decease.
What wrong is this unto the prince your son!
What good is this to England and himself!
Base, fearful and despairing Henry!
How hast thou injured both thyself and us!
I cannot stay to hear these articles.
Nor I.
Come, cousin, let us tell the queen these news.
Farewell, faint-hearted and degenerate king,
In whose cold blood no spark of honour bides.
Be thou a prey unto the house of York,
And die in bands for this unmanly deed!
In dreadful war mayst thou be overcome,
Or live in peace abandond and despised!
Exeunt NORTHUMBERLAND, CLIFFORD, and WESTMORELAND
Turn this way, Henry, and regard them not.
They seek revenge and therefore will not yield.
Ah, Exeter!
Why should you sigh, my lord?
Not for myself, Lord Warwick, but my son,
Whom I unnaturally shall disinherit.
But be it as it may: I here entail
The crown to thee and to thine heirs for ever;
Conditionally, that here thou take an oath
To cease this civil war, and, whilst I live,
To honour me as thy king and sovereign,
And neither by treason nor hostility
To seek to put me down and reign thyself.
This oath I willingly take and will perform.
Long live King Henry! Plantagenet embrace him.
And long live thou and these thy forward sons!
Now York and Lancaster are reconciled.
Accursed be he that seeks to make them foes!
Sennet. Here they come down
Farewell, my gracious lord; Ill to my castle.
And Ill keep London with my soldiers.
And I to Norfolk with my followers.
And I unto the sea from whence I came.
Exeunt YORK, EDWARD, EDMUND, GEORGE, RICHARD,  WARWICK, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, their Soldiers, and Attendants
And I, with grief and sorrow, to the court.
Enter QUEEN MARGARET and PRINCE EDWARD
Here comes the queen, whose looks bewray her anger:
Ill steal away.
Exeter, so will I.
Nay, go not from me; I will follow thee.
Be patient, gentle queen, and I will stay.
Who can be patient in such extremes?
Ah, wretched man! would I had died a maid
And never seen thee, never borne thee son,
Seeing thou hast proved so unnatural a father
Hath he deserved to lose his birthright thus?
Hadst thou but loved him half so well as I,
Or felt that pain which I did for him once,
Or nourishd him as I did with my blood,
Thou wouldst have left thy dearest heart-blood there,
Rather than have that savage duke thine heir
And disinherited thine only son.
Father, you cannot disinherit me:
If you be king, why should not I succeed?
Pardon me, Margaret; pardon me, sweet son:
The Earl of Warwick and the duke enforced me.
Enforced thee! art thou king, and wilt be forced?
I shame to hear thee speak. Ah, timorous wretch!
Thou hast undone thyself, thy son and me;
And given unto the house of York such head
As thou shalt reign but by their sufferance.
To entail him and his heirs unto the crown,
What is it, but to make thy sepulchre
And creep into it far before thy time?
Warwick is chancellor and the lord of Calais;
Stern Falconbridge commands the narrow seas;
The duke is made protector of the realm;
And yet shalt thou be safe? such safety finds
The trembling lamb environed with wolves.
Had I been there, which am a silly woman,
The soldiers should have tossd me on their pikes
Before I would have granted to that act.
But thou preferrst thy life before thine honour:
And seeing thou dost, I here divorce myself
Both from thy table, Henry, and thy bed,
Until that act of parliament be repeald
Whereby my son is disinherited.
The northern lords that have forsworn thy colours
Will follow mine, if once they see them spread;
And spread they shall be, to thy foul disgrace
And utter ruin of the house of York.
Thus do I leave thee. Come, son, lets away;
Our army is ready; come, well after them.
Stay, gentle Margaret, and hear me speak.
Thou hast spoke too much already: get thee gone.
Gentle son Edward, thou wilt stay with me?
Ay, to be murderd by his enemies.
When I return with victory from the field
Ill see your grace: till then Ill follow her.
Come, son, away; we may not linger thus.
Exeunt QUEEN MARGARET and PRINCE EDWARD
Poor queen! how love to me and to her son
Hath made her break out into terms of rage!
Revenged may she be on that hateful duke,
Whose haughty spirit, winged with desire,
Will cost my crown, and like an empty eagle
Tire on the flesh of me and of my son!
The loss of those three lords torments my heart:
Ill write unto them and entreat them fair.
Come, cousin you shall be the messenger.
And I, I hope, shall reconcile them all.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Sandal Castle.
Enter RICHARD, EDWARD, and MONTAGUE
Brother, though I be youngest, give me leave.
No, I can better play the orator.
But I have reasons strong and forcible.
Enter YORK
Why, how now, sons and brother! at a strife?
What is your quarrel? how began it first?
No quarrel, but a slight contention.
About what?
About that which concerns your grace and us;
The crown of England, father, which is yours.
Mine boy? not till King Henry be dead.
Your right depends not on his life or death.
Now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now:
By giving the house of Lancaster leave to breathe,
It will outrun you, father, in the end.
I took an oath that he should quietly reign.
But for a kingdom any oath may be broken:
I would break a thousand oaths to reign one year.
No; God forbid your grace should be forsworn.
I shall be, if I claim by open war.
Ill prove the contrary, if youll hear me speak.
Thou canst not, son; it is impossible.
An oath is of no moment, being not took
Before a true and lawful magistrate,
That hath authority over him that swears:
Henry had none, but did usurp the place;
Then, seeing twas he that made you to depose,
Your oath, my lord, is vain and frivolous.
Therefore, to arms! And, father, do but think
How sweet a thing it is to wear a crown;
Within whose circuit is Elysium
And all that poets feign of bliss and joy.
Why do we finger thus? I cannot rest
Until the white rose that I wear be dyed
Even in the lukewarm blood of Henrys heart.
Richard, enough; I will be king, or die.
Brother, thou shalt to London presently,
And whet on Warwick to this enterprise.
Thou, Richard, shalt to the Duke of Norfolk,
And tell him privily of our intent.
You Edward, shall unto my Lord Cobham,
With whom the Kentishmen will willingly rise:
In them I trust; for they are soldiers,
Witty, courteous, liberal, full of spirit.
While you are thus employd, what resteth more,
But that I seek occasion how to rise,
And yet the king not privy to my drift,
Nor any of the house of Lancaster?
Enter a Messenger
But, stay: what news? Why comest thou in such post?
The queen with all the northern earls and lords
Intend here to besiege you in your castle:
She is hard by with twenty thousand men;
And therefore fortify your hold, my lord.
Ay, with my sword. What! thinkst thou that we fear them?
Edward and Richard, you shall stay with me;
My brother Montague shall post to London:
Let noble Warwick, Cobham, and the rest,
Whom we have left protectors of the king,
With powerful policy strengthen themselves,
And trust not simple Henry nor his oaths.
Brother, I go; Ill win them, fear it not:
And thus most humbly I do take my leave.
Exit
Enter JOHN MORTIMER and HUGH MORTIMER
Sir John and Sir Hugh Mortimer, mine uncles,
You are come to Sandal in a happy hour;
The army of the queen mean to besiege us.
She shall not need; well meet her in the field.
What, with five thousand men?
Ay, with five hundred, father, for a need:
A womans general; what should we fear?
A march afar off
I hear their drums: lets set our men in order,
And issue forth and bid them battle straight.
Five men to twenty! though the odds be great,
I doubt not, uncle, of our victory.
Many a battle have I won in France,
When as the enemy hath been ten to one:
Why should I not now have the like success?
Alarum. Exeunt
SCENE III. Field of battle betwixt Sandal Castle and Wakefield.
Alarums. Enter RUTLAND and his Tutor
Ah, whither shall I fly to scape their hands?
Ah, tutor, look where bloody Clifford comes!
Enter CLIFFORD and Soldiers
Chaplain, away! thy priesthood saves thy life.
As for the brat of this accursed duke,
Whose father slew my father, he shall die.
And I, my lord, will bear him company.
Soldiers, away with him!
Ah, Clifford, murder not this innocent child,
Lest thou be hated both of God and man!
Exit, dragged off by Soldiers
How now! is he dead already? or is it fear
That makes him close his eyes? Ill open them.
So looks the pent-up lion oer the wretch
That trembles under his devouring paws;
And so he walks, insulting oer his prey,
And so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder.
Ah, gentle Clifford, kill me with thy sword,
And not with such a cruel threatening look.
Sweet Clifford, hear me speak before I die.
I am too mean a subject for thy wrath:
Be thou revenged on men, and let me live.
In vain thou speakst, poor boy; my fathers blood
Hath stoppd the passage where thy words should enter.
Then let my fathers blood open it again:
He is a man, and, Clifford, cope with him.
Had thy brethren here, their lives and thine
Were not revenge sufficient for me;
No, if I diggd up thy forefathers graves
And hung their rotten coffins up in chains,
It could not slake mine ire, nor ease my heart.
The sight of any of the house of York
Is as a fury to torment my soul;
And till I root out their accursed line
And leave not one alive, I live in hell.
Therefore--
Lifting his hand
O, let me pray before I take my death!
To thee I pray; sweet Clifford, pity me!
Such pity as my rapiers point affords.
I never did thee harm: why wilt thou slay me?
Thy father hath.
But twas ere I was born.
Thou hast one son; for his sake pity me,
Lest in revenge thereof, sith God is just,
He be as miserably slain as I.
Ah, let me live in prison all my days;
And when I give occasion of offence,
Then let me die, for now thou hast no cause.
No cause!
Thy father slew my father; therefore, die.
Stabs him
Di faciant laudis summa sit ista tuae!
Dies
Plantagenet! I come, Plantagenet!
And this thy sons blood cleaving to my blade
Shall rust upon my weapon, till thy blood,
Congeald with this, do make me wipe off both.
Exit
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
Alarum. Enter YORK
The army of the queen hath got the field:
My uncles both are slain in rescuing me;
And all my followers to the eager foe
Turn back and fly, like ships before the wind
Or lambs pursued by hunger-starved wolves.
My sons, God knows what hath bechanced them:
But this I know, they have demeand themselves
Like men born to renown by life or death.
Three times did Richard make a lane to me.
And thrice cried Courage, father! fight it out!
And full as oft came Edward to my side,
With purple falchion, painted to the hilt
In blood of those that had encounterd him:
And when the hardiest warriors did retire,
Richard cried Charge! and give no foot of ground!
And cried A crown, or else a glorious tomb!
A sceptre, or an earthly sepulchre!
With this, we charged again: but, out, alas!
We bodged again; as I have seen a swan
With bootless labour swim against the tide
And spend her strength with over-matching waves.
A short alarum within
Ah, hark! the fatal followers do pursue;
And I am faint and cannot fly their fury:
And were I strong, I would not shun their fury:
The sands are numberd that make up my life;
Here must I stay, and here my life must end.
Enter QUEEN MARGARET, CLIFFORD, NORTHUMBERLAND, PRINCE EDWARD, and Soldiers
Come, bloody Clifford, rough Northumberland,
I dare your quenchless fury to more rage:
I am your butt, and I abide your shot.
Yield to our mercy, proud Plantagenet.
Ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm,
With downright payment, showd unto my father.
Now Phaethon hath tumbled from his car,
And made an evening at the noontide prick.
My ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth
A bird that will revenge upon you all:
And in that hope I throw mine eyes to heaven,
Scorning whateer you can afflict me with.
Why come you not? what! multitudes, and fear?
So cowards fight when they can fly no further;
So doves do peck the falcons piercing talons;
