So desperate thieves, all hopeless of their lives,
Breathe out invectives gainst the officers.
O Clifford, but bethink thee once again,
And in thy thought oer-run my former time;
And, if though canst for blushing, view this face,
And bite thy tongue, that slanders him with cowardice
Whose frown hath made thee faint and fly ere this!
I will not bandy with thee word for word,
But buckle with thee blows, twice two for one.
Hold, valiant Clifford! for a thousand causes
I would prolong awhile the traitors life.
Wrath makes him deaf: speak thou, Northumberland.
Hold, Clifford! do not honour him so much
To prick thy finger, though to wound his heart:
What valour were it, when a cur doth grin,
For one to thrust his hand between his teeth,
When he might spurn him with his foot away?
It is wars prize to take all vantages;
And ten to one is no impeach of valour.
They lay hands on YORK, who struggles
Ay, ay, so strives the woodcock with the gin.
So doth the cony struggle in the net.
So triumph thieves upon their conquerd booty;
So true men yield, with robbers so oermatchd.
What would your grace have done unto him now?
Brave warriors, Clifford and Northumberland,
Come, make him stand upon this molehill here,
That raught at mountains with outstretched arms,
Yet parted but the shadow with his hand.
What! was it you that would be Englands king?
Wast you that revelld in our parliament,
And made a preachment of your high descent?
Where are your mess of sons to back you now?
The wanton Edward, and the lusty George?
And wheres that valiant crook-back prodigy,
Dicky your boy, that with his grumbling voice
Was wont to cheer his dad in mutinies?
Or, with the rest, where is your darling Rutland?
Look, York: I staind this napkin with the blood
That valiant Clifford, with his rapiers point,
Made issue from the bosom of the boy;
And if thine eyes can water for his death,
I give thee this to dry thy cheeks withal.
Alas poor York! but that I hate thee deadly,
I should lament thy miserable state.
I prithee, grieve, to make me merry, York.
What, hath thy fiery heart so parchd thine entrails
That not a tear can fall for Rutlands death?
Why art thou patient, man? thou shouldst be mad;
And I, to make thee mad, do mock thee thus.
Stamp, rave, and fret, that I may sing and dance.
Thou wouldst be feed, I see, to make me sport:
York cannot speak, unless he wear a crown.
A crown for York! and, lords, bow low to him:
Hold you his hands, whilst I do set it on.
Putting a paper crown on his head
Ay, marry, sir, now looks he like a king!
Ay, this is he that took King Henrys chair,
And this is he was his adopted heir.
But how is it that great Plantagenet
Is crownd so soon, and broke his solemn oath?
As I bethink me, you should not be king
Till our King Henry had shook hands with death.
And will you pale your head in Henrys glory,
And rob his temples of the diadem,
Now in his life, against your holy oath?
O, tis a fault too too unpardonable!
Off with the crown, and with the crown his head;
And, whilst we breathe, take time to do him dead.
That is my office, for my fathers sake.
Nay, stay; lets hear the orisons he makes.
She-wolf of France, but worse than wolves of France,
Whose tongue more poisons than the adders tooth!
How ill-beseeming is it in thy sex
To triumph, like an Amazonian trull,
Upon their woes whom fortune captivates!
But that thy face is, vizard-like, unchanging,
Made impudent with use of evil deeds,
I would assay, proud queen, to make thee blush.
To tell thee whence thou camest, of whom derived,
Were shame enough to shame thee, wert thou not shameless.
Thy father bears the type of King of Naples,
Of both the Sicils and Jerusalem,
Yet not so wealthy as an English yeoman.
Hath that poor monarch taught thee to insult?
It needs not, nor it boots thee not, proud queen,
Unless the adage must be verified,
That beggars mounted run their horse to death.
Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud;
But, God he knows, thy share thereof is small:
Tis virtue that doth make them most admired;
The contrary doth make thee wonderd at:
Tis government that makes them seem divine;
The want thereof makes thee abominable:
Thou art as opposite to every good
As the Antipodes are unto us,
Or as the south to the septentrion.
O tigers heart wrapt in a womans hide!
How couldst thou drain the life-blood of the child,
To bid the father wipe his eyes withal,
And yet be seen to bear a womans face?
Women are soft, mild, pitiful and flexible;
Thou stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless.
Bidst thou me rage? why, now thou hast thy wish:
Wouldst have me weep? why, now thou hast thy will:
For raging wind blows up incessant showers,
And when the rage allays, the rain begins.
These tears are my sweet Rutlands obsequies:
And every drop cries vengeance for his death,
Gainst thee, fell Clifford, and thee, false
Frenchwoman.
Beshrew me, but his passion moves me so
That hardly can I cheque my eyes from tears.
That face of his the hungry cannibals
Would not have touchd, would not have staind with blood:
But you are more inhuman, more inexorable,
O, ten times more, than tigers of Hyrcania.
See, ruthless queen, a hapless fathers tears:
This cloth thou dipdst in blood of my sweet boy,
And I with tears do wash the blood away.
Keep thou the napkin, and go boast of this:
And if thou tellst the heavy story right,
Upon my soul, the hearers will shed tears;
Yea even my foes will shed fast-falling tears,
And say Alas, it was a piteous deed!
There, take the crown, and, with the crown, my curse;
And in thy need such comfort come to thee
As now I reap at thy too cruel hand!
Hard-hearted Clifford, take me from the world:
My soul to heaven, my blood upon your heads!
Had he been slaughter-man to all my kin,
I should not for my life but weep with him.
To see how inly sorrow gripes his soul.
What, weeping-ripe, my Lord Northumberland?
Think but upon the wrong he did us all,
And that will quickly dry thy melting tears.
Heres for my oath, heres for my fathers death.
Stabbing him
And heres to right our gentle-hearted king.
Stabbing him
Open Thy gate of mercy, gracious God!
My soul flies through these wounds to seek out Thee.
Dies
Off with his head, and set it on York gates;
So York may overlook the town of York.
Flourish. Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. A plain near Mortimers Cross in Herefordshire.
A march. Enter EDWARD, RICHARD, and their power
I wonder how our princely father scaped,
Or whether he be scaped away or no
From Cliffords and Northumberlands pursuit:
Had he been taen, we should have heard the news;
Had he been slain, we should have heard the news;
Or had he scaped, methinks we should have heard
The happy tidings of his good escape.
How fares my brother? why is he so sad?
I cannot joy, until I be resolved
Where our right valiant father is become.
I saw him in the battle range about;
And watchd him how he singled Clifford forth.
Methought he bore him in the thickest troop
As doth a lion in a herd of neat;
Or as a bear, encompassd round with dogs,
Who having pinchd a few and made them cry,
The rest stand all aloof, and bark at him.
So fared our father with his enemies;
So fled his enemies my warlike father:
Methinks, tis prize enough to be his son.
See how the morning opes her golden gates,
And takes her farewell of the glorious sun!
How well resembles it the prime of youth,
Trimmd like a younker prancing to his love!
Dazzle mine eyes, or do I see three suns?
Three glorious suns, each one a perfect sun;
Not separated with the racking clouds,
But severd in a pale clear-shining sky.
See, see! they join, embrace, and seem to kiss,
As if they vowd some league inviolable:
Now are they but one lamp, one light, one sun.
In this the heaven figures some event.
Tis wondrous strange, the like yet never heard of.
I think it cites us, brother, to the field,
That we, the sons of brave Plantagenet,
Each one already blazing by our meeds,
Should notwithstanding join our lights together
And over-shine the earth as this the world.
Whateer it bodes, henceforward will I bear
Upon my target three fair-shining suns.
Nay, bear three daughters: by your leave I speak it,
You love the breeder better than the male.
Enter a Messenger
But what art thou, whose heavy looks foretell
Some dreadful story hanging on thy tongue?
Ah, one that was a woful looker-on
When as the noble Duke of York was slain,
Your princely father and my loving lord!
O, speak no more, for I have heard too much.
Say how he died, for I will hear it all.
Environed he was with many foes,
And stood against them, as the hope of Troy
Against the Greeks that would have enterd Troy.
But Hercules himself must yield to odds;
And many strokes, though with a little axe,
Hew down and fell the hardest-timberd oak.
By many hands your father was subdued;
But only slaughterd by the ireful arm
Of unrelenting Clifford and the queen,
Who crownd the gracious duke in high despite,
Laughd in his face; and when with grief he wept,
The ruthless queen gave him to dry his cheeks
A napkin steeped in the harmless blood
Of sweet young Rutland, by rough Clifford slain:
And after many scorns, many foul taunts,
They took his head, and on the gates of York
They set the same; and there it doth remain,
The saddest spectacle that eer I viewd.
Sweet Duke of York, our prop to lean upon,
Now thou art gone, we have no staff, no stay.
O Clifford, boisterous Clifford! thou hast slain
The flower of Europe for his chivalry;
And treacherously hast thou vanquishd him,
For hand to hand he would have vanquishd thee.
Now my souls palace is become a prison:
Ah, would she break from hence, that this my body
Might in the ground be closed up in rest!
For never henceforth shall I joy again,
Never, O never shall I see more joy!
I cannot weep; for all my bodys moisture
Scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart:
Nor can my tongue unload my hearts great burthen;
For selfsame wind that I should speak withal
Is kindling coals that fires all my breast,
And burns me up with flames that tears would quench.
To weep is to make less the depth of grief:
Tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me
Richard, I bear thy name; Ill venge thy death,
Or die renowned by attempting it.
His name that valiant duke hath left with thee;
His dukedom and his chair with me is left.
Nay, if thou be that princely eagles bird,
Show thy descent by gazing gainst the sun:
For chair and dukedom, throne and kingdom say;
Either that is thine, or else thou wert not his.
March. Enter WARWICK, MONTAGUE, and their army
How now, fair lords! What fare? what news abroad?
Great Lord of Warwick, if we should recount
Our baleful news, and at each words deliverance
Stab poniards in our flesh till all were told,
The words would add more anguish than the wounds.
O valiant lord, the Duke of York is slain!
O Warwick, Warwick! that Plantagenet,
Which held three dearly as his souls redemption,
Is by the stern Lord Clifford done to death.
Ten days ago I drownd these news in tears;
And now, to add more measure to your woes,
I come to tell you things sith then befalln.
After the bloody fray at Wakefield fought,
Where your brave father breathed his latest gasp,
Tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run,
Were brought me of your loss and his depart.
I, then in London keeper of the king,
Musterd my soldiers, gatherd flocks of friends,
And very well appointed, as I thought,
Marchd toward Saint Albans to intercept the queen,
Bearing the king in my behalf along;
For by my scouts I was advertised
That she was coming with a full intent
To dash our late decree in parliament
Touching King Henrys oath and your succession.
Short tale to make, we at Saint Albans met
Our battles joind, and both sides fiercely fought:
But whether twas the coldness of the king,
Who lookd full gently on his warlike queen,
That robbd my soldiers of their heated spleen;
Or whether twas report of her success;
Or more than common fear of Cliffords rigour,
Who thunders to his captives blood and death,
I cannot judge: but to conclude with truth,
Their weapons like to lightning came and went;
Our soldiers, like the night-owls lazy flight,
Or like an idle thresher with a flail,
Fell gently down, as if they struck their friends.
I cheerd them up with justice of our cause,
With promise of high pay and great rewards:
But all in vain; they had no heart to fight,
And we in them no hope to win the day;
So that we fled; the king unto the queen;
Lord George your brother, Norfolk and myself,
In haste, post-haste, are come to join with you:
For in the marches here we heard you were,
Making another head to fight again.
Where is the Duke of Norfolk, gentle Warwick?
And when came George from Burgundy to England?
Some six miles off the duke is with the soldiers;
And for your brother, he was lately sent
From your kind aunt, Duchess of Burgundy,
With aid of soldiers to this needful war.
Twas odds, belike, when valiant Warwick fled:
Oft have I heard his praises in pursuit,
But neer till now his scandal of retire.
Nor now my scandal, Richard, dost thou hear;
For thou shalt know this strong right hand of mine
Can pluck the diadem from faint Henrys head,
And wring the awful sceptre from his fist,
Were he as famous and as bold in war
As he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.
I know it well, Lord Warwick; blame me not:
Tis love I bear thy glories makes me speak.
But in this troublous time whats to be done?
Shall we go throw away our coats of steel,
And wrap our bodies in black mourning gowns,
Numbering our Ave-Maries with our beads?
Or shall we on the helmets of our foes
Tell our devotion with revengeful arms?
If for the last, say ay, and to it, lords.
Why, therefore Warwick came to seek you out;
And therefore comes my brother Montague.
Attend me, lords. The proud insulting queen,
With Clifford and the haught Northumberland,
And of their feather many more proud birds,
Have wrought the easy-melting king like wax.
He swore consent to your succession,
His oath enrolled in the parliament;
And now to London all the crew are gone,
To frustrate both his oath and what beside
May make against the house of Lancaster.
Their power, I think, is thirty thousand strong:
Now, if the help of Norfolk and myself,
With all the friends that thou, brave Earl of March,
Amongst the loving Welshmen canst procure,
Will but amount to five and twenty thousand,
Why, Via! to London will we march amain,
And once again bestride our foaming steeds,
And once again cry Charge upon our foes!
But never once again turn back and fly.
Ay, now methinks I hear great Warwick speak:
Neer may he live to see a sunshine day,
That cries Retire, if Warwick bid him stay.
Lord Warwick, on thy shoulder will I lean;
And when thou failst--as God forbid the hour!--
Must Edward fall, which peril heaven forfend!
No longer Earl of March, but Duke of York:
The next degree is Englands royal throne;
For King of England shalt thou be proclaimd
In every borough as we pass along;
And he that throws not up his cap for joy
Shall for the fault make forfeit of his head.
King Edward, valiant Richard, Montague,
Stay we no longer, dreaming of renown,
But sound the trumpets, and about our task.
Then, Clifford, were thy heart as hard as steel,
As thou hast shown it flinty by thy deeds,
I come to pierce it, or to give thee mine.
Then strike up drums: God and Saint George for us!
Enter a Messenger
How now! what news?
The Duke of Norfolk sends you word by me,
The queen is coming with a puissant host;
And craves your company for speedy counsel.
Why then it sorts, brave warriors, lets away.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Before York.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, QUEEN MARGARET,  PRINCE EDWARD, CLIFFORD, and NORTHUMBERLAND, with drum and trumpets
Welcome, my lord, to this brave town of York.
Yonders the head of that arch-enemy
That sought to be encompassd with your crown:
Doth not the object cheer your heart, my lord?
Ay, as the rocks cheer them that fear their wreck:
To see this sight, it irks my very soul.
Withhold revenge, dear God! tis not my fault,
Nor wittingly have I infringed my vow.
My gracious liege, this too much lenity
And harmful pity must be laid aside.
To whom do lions cast their gentle looks?
Not to the beast that would usurp their den.
Whose hand is that the forest bear doth lick?
Not his that spoils her young before her face.
Who scapes the lurking serpents mortal sting?
Not he that sets his foot upon her back.
The smallest worm will turn being trodden on,
And doves will peck in safeguard of their brood.
Ambitious York doth level at thy crown,
Thou smiling while he knit his angry brows:
He, but a duke, would have his son a king,
And raise his issue, like a loving sire;
Thou, being a king, blest with a goodly son,
Didst yield consent to disinherit him,
Which argued thee a most unloving father.
Unreasonable creatures feed their young;
And though mans face be fearful to their eyes,
Yet, in protection of their tender ones,
Who hath not seen them, even with those wings
Which sometime they have used with fearful flight,
Make war with him that climbd unto their nest,
Offer their own lives in their youngs defence?
For shame, my liege, make them your precedent!
Were it not pity that this goodly boy
Should lose his birthright by his fathers fault,
And long hereafter say unto his child,
What my great-grandfather and his grandsire got
My careless father fondly gave away?
Ah, what a shame were this! Look on the boy;
And let his manly face, which promiseth
Successful fortune, steel thy melting heart
To hold thine own and leave thine own with him.
Full well hath Clifford playd the orator,
Inferring arguments of mighty force.
But, Clifford, tell me, didst thou never hear
That things ill-got had ever bad success?
And happy always was it for that son
Whose father for his hoarding went to hell?
Ill leave my son my virtuous deeds behind;
And would my father had left me no more!
For all the rest is held at such a rate
As brings a thousand-fold more care to keep
Than in possession and jot of pleasure.
Ah, cousin York! would thy best friends did know
How it doth grieve me that thy head is here!
My lord, cheer up your spirits: our foes are nigh,
And this soft courage makes your followers faint.
You promised knighthood to our forward son:
Unsheathe your sword, and dub him presently.
Edward, kneel down.
Edward Plantagenet, arise a knight;
And learn this lesson, draw thy sword in right.
My gracious father, by your kingly leave,
Ill draw it as apparent to the crown,
And in that quarrel use it to the death.
Why, that is spoken like a toward prince.
Enter a Messenger
Royal commanders, be in readiness:
For with a band of thirty thousand men
Comes Warwick, backing of the Duke of York;
And in the towns, as they do march along,
Proclaims him king, and many fly to him:
Darraign your battle, for they are at hand.
I would your highness would depart the field:
The queen hath best success when you are absent.
Ay, good my lord, and leave us to our fortune.
Why, thats my fortune too; therefore Ill stay.
Be it with resolution then to fight.
My royal father, cheer these noble lords
And hearten those that fight in your defence:
Unsheathe your sword, good father; cry Saint George!
March. Enter EDWARD, GEORGE, RICHARD, WARWICK, NORFOLK, MONTAGUE, and Soldiers
Now, perjured Henry! wilt thou kneel for grace,
And set thy diadem upon my head;
Or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
Go, rate thy minions, proud insulting boy!
Becomes it thee to be thus bold in terms
Before thy sovereign and thy lawful king?
I am his king, and he should bow his knee;
I was adopted heir by his consent:
Since when, his oath is broke; for, as I hear,
You, that are king, though he do wear the crown,
Have caused him, by new act of parliament,
To blot out me, and put his own son in.
And reason too:
Who should succeed the father but the son?
Are you there, butcher? O, I cannot speak!
Ay, crook-back, here I stand to answer thee,
Or any he the proudest of thy sort.
Twas you that killd young Rutland, was it not?
Ay, and old York, and yet not satisfied.
For Gods sake, lords, give signal to the fight.
What sayst thou, Henry, wilt thou yield the crown?
Why, how now, long-tongued Warwick! dare you speak?
When you and I met at Saint Albans last,
Your legs did better service than your hands.
Then twas my turn to fly, and now tis thine.
You said so much before, and yet you fled.
Twas not your valour, Clifford, drove me thence.
No, nor your manhood that durst make you stay.
Northumberland, I hold thee reverently.
Break off the parley; for scarce I can refrain
The execution of my big-swoln heart
Upon that Clifford, that cruel child-killer.
I slew thy father, callst thou him a child?
Ay, like a dastard and a treacherous coward,
As thou didst kill our tender brother Rutland;
But ere sunset Ill make thee curse the deed.
Have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.
Defy them then, or else hold close thy lips.
I prithee, give no limits to my tongue:
I am a king, and privileged to speak.
My liege, the wound that bred this meeting here
Cannot be cured by words; therefore be still.
Then, executioner, unsheathe thy sword:
By him that made us all, I am resolved
that Cliffords manhood lies upon his tongue.
Say, Henry, shall I have my right, or no?
A thousand men have broke their fasts to-day,
That neer shall dine unless thou yield the crown.
If thou deny, their blood upon thy head;
For York in justice puts his armour on.
If that be right which Warwick says is right,
There is no wrong, but every thing is right.
Whoever got thee, there thy mother stands;
For, well I wot, thou hast thy mothers tongue.
But thou art neither like thy sire nor dam;
But like a foul mis-shapen stigmatic,
Markd by the destinies to be avoided,
As venom toads, or lizards dreadful stings.
Iron of Naples hid with English gilt,
Whose father bears the title of a king,--
As if a channel should be calld the sea,--
Shamest thou not, knowing whence thou art extraught,
To let thy tongue detect thy base-born heart?
A wisp of straw were worth a thousand crowns,
To make this shameless callet know herself.
Helen of Greece was fairer far than thou,
Although thy husband may be Menelaus;
And neer was Agamemnons brother wrongd
By that false woman, as this king by thee.
His father revelld in the heart of France,
And tamed the king, and made the dauphin stoop;
And had he matchd according to his state,
He might have kept that glory to this day;
But when he took a beggar to his bed,
And graced thy poor sire with his bridal-day,
Even then that sunshine brewd a shower for him,
That washd his fathers fortunes forth of France,
And heapd sedition on his crown at home.
For what hath broachd this tumult but thy pride?
Hadst thou been meek, our title still had slept;
And we, in pity of the gentle king,
Had slippd our claim until another age.
But when we saw our sunshine made thy spring,
And that thy summer bred us no increase,
We set the axe to thy usurping root;
And though the edge hath something hit ourselves,
Yet, know thou, since we have begun to strike,
Well never leave till we have hewn thee down,
Or bathed thy growing with our heated bloods.
And, in this resolution, I defy thee;
Not willing any longer conference,
Since thou deniest the gentle king to speak.
Sound trumpets! let our bloody colours wave!
And either victory, or else a grave.
Stay, Edward.
No, wrangling woman, well no longer stay:
These words will cost ten thousand lives this day.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A field of battle between Towton and Saxton, in
Yorkshire.
Alarum. Excursions. Enter WARWICK
Forspent with toil, as runners with a race,
I lay me down a little while to breathe;
For strokes received, and many blows repaid,
Have robbd my strong-knit sinews of their strength,
And spite of spite needs must I rest awhile.
Enter EDWARD, running
Smile, gentle heaven! or strike, ungentle death!
For this world frowns, and Edwards sun is clouded.
How now, my lord! what hap? what hope of good?
Enter GEORGE
Our hap is loss, our hope but sad despair;
Our ranks are broke, and ruin follows us:
What counsel give you? whither shall we fly?
Bootless is flight, they follow us with wings;
And weak we are and cannot shun pursuit.
Enter RICHARD
Ah, Warwick, why hast thou withdrawn thyself?
Thy brothers blood the thirsty earth hath drunk,
Broachd with the steely point of Cliffords lance;
And in the very pangs of death he cried,
Like to a dismal clangour heard from far,
Warwick, revenge! brother, revenge my death!
So, underneath the belly of their steeds,
That staind their fetlocks in his smoking blood,
The noble gentleman gave up the ghost.
Then let the earth be drunken with our blood:
Ill kill my horse, because I will not fly.
Why stand we like soft-hearted women here,
Wailing our losses, whiles the foe doth rage;
And look upon, as if the tragedy
Were playd in jest by counterfeiting actors?
Here on my knee I vow to God above,
Ill never pause again, never stand still,
Till either death hath closed these eyes of mine
Or fortune given me measure of revenge.
O Warwick, I do bend my knee with thine;
And in this vow do chain my soul to thine!
And, ere my knee rise from the earths cold face,
I throw my hands, mine eyes, my heart to thee,
Thou setter up and plucker down of kings,
Beseeching thee, if with they will it stands
That to my foes this body must be prey,
Yet that thy brazen gates of heaven may ope,
And give sweet passage to my sinful soul!
Now, lords, take leave until we meet again,
Whereer it be, in heaven or in earth.
Brother, give me thy hand; and, gentle Warwick,
Let me embrace thee in my weary arms:
I, that did never weep, now melt with woe
That winter should cut off our spring-time so.
Away, away! Once more, sweet lords farewell.
Yet let us all together to our troops,
And give them leave to fly that will not stay;
And call them pillars that will stand to us;
And, if we thrive, promise them such rewards
As victors wear at the Olympian games:
This may plant courage in their quailing breasts;
For yet is hope of life and victory.
Forslow no longer, make we hence amain.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Another part of the field.
Excursions. Enter RICHARD and CLIFFORD
Now, Clifford, I have singled thee alone:
Suppose this arm is for the Duke of York,
And this for Rutland; both bound to revenge,
Wert thou environd with a brazen wall.
Now, Richard, I am with thee here alone:
This is the hand that stabbd thy father York;
And this the hand that slew thy brother Rutland;
And heres the heart that triumphs in their death
And cheers these hands that slew thy sire and brother
To execute the like upon thyself;
And so, have at thee!
They fight. WARWICK comes; CLIFFORD flies
Nay Warwick, single out some other chase;
For I myself will hunt this wolf to death.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
Alarum. Enter KING HENRY VI alone
This battle fares like to the mornings war,
When dying clouds contend with growing light,
What time the shepherd, blowing of his nails,
Can neither call it perfect day nor night.
Now sways it this way, like a mighty sea
Forced by the tide to combat with the wind;
Now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea
Forced to retire by fury of the wind:
Sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind;
Now one the better, then another best;
Both tugging to be victors, breast to breast,
Yet neither conqueror nor conquered:
So is the equal of this fell war.
Here on this molehill will I sit me down.
To whom God will, there be the victory!
For Margaret my queen, and Clifford too,
Have chid me from the battle; swearing both
They prosper best of all when I am thence.
Would I were dead! if Gods good will were so;
For what is in this world but grief and woe?
O God! methinks it were a happy life,
To be no better than a homely swain;
To sit upon a hill, as I do now,
To carve out dials quaintly, point by point,
Thereby to see the minutes how they run,
How many make the hour full complete;
How many hours bring about the day;
How many days will finish up the year;
How many years a mortal man may live.
When this is known, then to divide the times:
So many hours must I tend my flock;
So many hours must I take my rest;
So many hours must I contemplate;
So many hours must I sport myself;
So many days my ewes have been with young;
So many weeks ere the poor fools will ean:
So many years ere I shall shear the fleece:
So minutes, hours, days, months, and years,
Passd over to the end they were created,
Would bring white hairs unto a quiet grave.
Ah, what a life were this! how sweet! how lovely!
Gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shade
To shepherds looking on their silly sheep,
Than doth a rich embroiderd canopy
To kings that fear their subjects treachery?
O, yes, it doth; a thousand-fold it doth.
And to conclude, the shepherds homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle.
His wonted sleep under a fresh trees shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a princes delicates,
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
His body couched in a curious bed,
When care, mistrust, and treason waits on him.
Alarum. Enter a Son that has killed his father, dragging in the dead body
Ill blows the wind that profits nobody.
This man, whom hand to hand I slew in fight,
May be possessed with some store of crowns;
And I, that haply take them from him now,
May yet ere night yield both my life and them
To some man else, as this dead man doth me.
Whos this? O God! it is my fathers face,
Whom in this conflict I unwares have killd.
O heavy times, begetting such events!
From London by the king was I pressd forth;
My father, being the Earl of Warwicks man,
Came on the part of York, pressd by his master;
And I, who at his hands received my life, him
Have by my hands of life bereaved him.
Pardon me, God, I knew not what I did!
And pardon, father, for I knew not thee!
My tears shall wipe away these bloody marks;
And no more words till they have flowd their fill.
O piteous spectacle! O bloody times!
Whiles lions war and battle for their dens,
Poor harmless lambs abide their enmity.
Weep, wretched man, Ill aid thee tear for tear;
And let our hearts and eyes, like civil war,
Be blind with tears, and break oercharged with grief.
Enter a Father that has killed his son, bringing in the body
Thou that so stoutly hast resisted me,
Give me thy gold, if thou hast any gold:
For I have bought it with an hundred blows.
But let me see: is this our foemans face?
Ah, no, no, no, it is mine only son!
Ah, boy, if any life be left in thee,
Throw up thine eye! see, see what showers arise,
Blown with the windy tempest of my heart,
Upon thy words, that kill mine eye and heart!
O, pity, God, this miserable age!
What stratagems, how fell, how butcherly,
Erroneous, mutinous and unnatural,
This deadly quarrel daily doth beget!
O boy, thy father gave thee life too soon,
And hath bereft thee of thy life too late!
Woe above woe! grief more than common grief!
O that my death would stay these ruthful deeds!
O pity, pity, gentle heaven, pity!
The red rose and the white are on his face,
The fatal colours of our striving houses:
The one his purple blood right well resembles;
The other his pale cheeks, methinks, presenteth:
Wither one rose, and let the other flourish;
If you contend, a thousand lives must wither.
How will my mother for a fathers death
Take on with me and neer be satisfied!
How will my wife for slaughter of my son
Shed seas of tears and neer be satisfied!
How will the country for these woful chances
Misthink the king and not be satisfied!
Was ever son so rued a fathers death?
Was ever father so bemoand his son?
Was ever king so grieved for subjects woe?
Much is your sorrow; mine ten times so much.
Ill bear thee hence, where I may weep my fill.
Exit with the body
These arms of mine shall be thy winding-sheet;
My heart, sweet boy, shall be thy sepulchre,
For from my heart thine image neer shall go;
My sighing breast shall be thy funeral bell;
And so obsequious will thy father be,
Even for the loss of thee, having no more,
As Priam was for all his valiant sons.
Ill bear thee hence; and let them fight that will,
For I have murdered where I should not kill.
Exit with the body
Sad-hearted men, much overgone with care,
Here sits a king more woful than you are.
Alarums: excursions. Enter QUEEN MARGARET, PRINCE EDWARD, and EXETER
Fly, father, fly! for all your friends are fled,
And Warwick rages like a chafed bull:
Away! for death doth hold us in pursuit.
Mount you, my lord; towards Berwick post amain:
Edward and Richard, like a brace of greyhounds
Having the fearful flying hare in sight,
With fiery eyes sparkling for very wrath,
And bloody steel graspd in their ireful hands,
Are at our backs; and therefore hence amain.
Away! for vengeance comes along with them:
Nay, stay not to expostulate, make speed;
Or else come after: Ill away before.
Nay, take me with thee, good sweet Exeter:
Not that I fear to stay, but love to go
Whither the queen intends. Forward; away!
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Another part of the field.
A loud alarum. Enter CLIFFORD, wounded
Here burns my candle out; ay, here it dies,
Which, whiles it lasted, gave King Henry light.
O Lancaster, I fear thy overthrow
More than my bodys parting with my soul!
My love and fear glued many friends to thee;
And, now I fall, thy tough commixture melts.
Impairing Henry, strengthening misproud York,
The common people swarm like summer flies;
And whither fly the gnats but to the sun?
And who shines now but Henrys enemies?
O Phoebus, hadst thou never given consent
That Phaethon should cheque thy fiery steeds,
Thy burning car never had scorchd the earth!
And, Henry, hadst thou swayd as kings should do,
Or as thy father and his father did,
Giving no ground unto the house of York,
They never then had sprung like summer flies;
I and ten thousand in this luckless realm
Had left no mourning widows for our death;
And thou this day hadst kept thy chair in peace.
For what doth cherish weeds but gentle air?
And what makes robbers bold but too much lenity?
Bootless are plaints, and cureless are my wounds;
No way to fly, nor strength to hold out flight:
The foe is merciless, and will not pity;
For at their hands I have deserved no pity.
The air hath got into my deadly wounds,
And much effuse of blood doth make me faint.
Come, York and Richard, Warwick and the rest;
I stabbd your fathers bosoms, split my breast.
He faints
Alarum and retreat. Enter EDWARD, GEORGE, RICHARD, MONTAGUE, WARWICK, and Soldiers
Now breathe we, lords: good fortune bids us pause,
And smooth the frowns of war with peaceful looks.
Some troops pursue the bloody-minded queen,
That led calm Henry, though he were a king,
As doth a sail, filld with a fretting gust,
Command an argosy to stem the waves.
But think you, lords, that Clifford fled with them?
No, tis impossible he should escape,
For, though before his face I speak the words
Your brother Richard markd him for the grave:
And wheresoeer he is, hes surely dead.
CLIFFORD groans, and dies
Whose soul is that which takes her heavy leave?
A deadly groan, like life and deaths departing.
See who it is: and, now the battles ended,
If friend or foe, let him be gently used.
Revoke that doom of mercy, for tis Clifford;
Who not contented that he loppd the branch
In hewing Rutland when his leaves put forth,
But set his murdering knife unto the root
From whence that tender spray did sweetly spring,
I mean our princely father, Duke of York.
From off the gates of York fetch down the head,
Your fathers head, which Clifford placed there;
Instead whereof let this supply the room:
Measure for measure must be answered.
Bring forth that fatal screech-owl to our house,
That nothing sung but death to us and ours:
Now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound,
And his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.
I think his understanding is bereft.
Speak, Clifford, dost thou know who speaks to thee?
Dark cloudy death oershades his beams of life,
And he nor sees nor hears us what we say.
O, would he did! and so perhaps he doth:
Tis but his policy to counterfeit,
Because he would avoid such bitter taunts
Which in the time of death he gave our father.
If so thou thinkst, vex him with eager words.
Clifford, ask mercy and obtain no grace.
Clifford, repent in bootless penitence.
Clifford, devise excuses for thy faults.
While we devise fell tortures for thy faults.
Thou didst love York, and I am son to York.
Thou pitiedst Rutland; I will pity thee.
Wheres Captain Margaret, to fence you now?
They mock thee, Clifford: swear as thou wast wont.
What, not an oath? nay, then the world goes hard
When Clifford cannot spare his friends an oath.
I know by that hes dead; and, by my soul,
If this right hand would buy two hours life,
That I in all despite might rail at him,
This hand should chop it off, and with the
issuing blood
Stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst
York and young Rutland could not satisfy.
Ay, but hes dead: off with the traitors head,
And rear it in the place your fathers stands.
And now to London with triumphant march,
There to be crowned Englands royal king:
From whence shall Warwick cut the sea to France,
And ask the Lady Bona for thy queen:
So shalt thou sinew both these lands together;
And, having France thy friend, thou shalt not dread
The scatterd foe that hopes to rise again;
For though they cannot greatly sting to hurt,
Yet look to have them buzz to offend thine ears.
First will I see the coronation;
And then to Brittany Ill cross the sea,
To effect this marriage, so it please my lord.
Even as thou wilt, sweet Warwick, let it be;
For in thy shoulder do I build my seat,
And never will I undertake the thing
Wherein thy counsel and consent is wanting.
Richard, I will create thee Duke of Gloucester,
And George, of Clarence: Warwick, as ourself,
Shall do and undo as him pleaseth best.
Let me be Duke of Clarence, George of Gloucester;
For Gloucesters dukedom is too ominous.
Tut, thats a foolish observation:
Richard, be Duke of Gloucester. Now to London,
To see these honours in possession.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. A forest in the north of England.
Enter two Keepers, with cross-bows in their hands
Under this thick-grown brake well shroud ourselves;
For through this laund anon the deer will come;
And in this covert will we make our stand,
Culling the principal of all the deer.
Ill stay above the hill, so both may shoot.
That cannot be; the noise of thy cross-bow
Will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost.
Here stand we both, and aim we at the best:
And, for the time shall not seem tedious,
Ill tell thee what befell me on a day
In this self-place where now we mean to stand.
Here comes a man; lets stay till he be past.
Enter KING HENRY VI, disguised, with a prayerbook
From Scotland am I stoln, even of pure love,
To greet mine own land with my wishful sight.
No, Harry, Harry, tis no land of thine;
Thy place is filld, thy sceptre wrung from thee,
Thy balm washd off wherewith thou wast anointed:
No bending knee will call thee Caesar now,
No humble suitors press to speak for right,
No, not a man comes for redress of thee;
For how can I help them, and not myself?
Ay, heres a deer whose skins a keepers fee:
This is the quondam king; lets seize upon him.
Let me embrace thee, sour adversity,
For wise men say it is the wisest course.
Why linger we? let us lay hands upon him.
Forbear awhile; well hear a little more.
My queen and son are gone to France for aid;
And, as I hear, the great commanding Warwick
Is thither gone, to crave the French kings sister
To wife for Edward: if this news be true,
Poor queen and son, your labour is but lost;
For Warwick is a subtle orator,
And Lewis a prince soon won with moving words.
By this account then Margaret may win him;
For shes a woman to be pitied much:
Her sighs will make a battery in his breast;
Her tears will pierce into a marble heart;
The tiger will be mild whiles she doth mourn;
And Nero will be tainted with remorse,
To hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears.
Ay, but shes come to beg, Warwick to give;
She, on his left side, craving aid for Henry,
He, on his right, asking a wife for Edward.
She weeps, and says her Henry is deposed;
He smiles, and says his Edward is installd;
That she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more;
Whiles Warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong,
Inferreth arguments of mighty strength,
And in conclusion wins the king from her,
With promise of his sister, and what else,
To strengthen and support King Edwards place.
O Margaret, thus twill be; and thou, poor soul,
Art then forsaken, as thou wentst forlorn!
Say, what art thou that talkst of kings and queens?
More than I seem, and less than I was born to:
A man at least, for less I should not be;
And men may talk of kings, and why not I?
Ay, but thou talkst as if thou wert a king.
Why, so I am, in mind; and thats enough.
But, if thou be a king, where is thy crown?
My crown is in my heart, not on my head;
Not decked with diamonds and Indian stones,
Nor to be seen: my crown is called content:
A crown it is that seldom kings enjoy.
Well, if you be a king crownd with content,
Your crown content and you must be contented
To go along with us; for as we think,
You are the king King Edward hath deposed;
And we his subjects sworn in all allegiance
Will apprehend you as his enemy.
But did you never swear, and break an oath?
No, never such an oath; nor will not now.
Where did you dwell when I was King of England?
Here in this country, where we now remain.
I was anointed king at nine months old;
My father and my grandfather were kings,
And you were sworn true subjects unto me:
And tell me, then, have you not broke your oaths?
No;
For we were subjects but while you were king.
Why, am I dead? do I not breathe a man?
Ah, simple men, you know not what you swear!
Look, as I blow this feather from my face,
And as the air blows it to me again,
Obeying with my wind when I do blow,
And yielding to another when it blows,
Commanded always by the greater gust;
Such is the lightness of you common men.
But do not break your oaths; for of that sin
My mild entreaty shall not make you guilty.
Go where you will, the king shall be commanded;
And be you kings, command, and Ill obey.
We are true subjects to the king, King Edward.
So would you be again to Henry,
If he were seated as King Edward is.
We charge you, in Gods name, and the kings,
To go with us unto the officers.
In Gods name, lead; your kings name be obeyd:
And what God will, that let your king perform;
And what he will, I humbly yield unto.
Exeunt
SCENE II. London. The palace.
Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and LADY GREY
Brother of Gloucester, at Saint Albans field
This ladys husband, Sir Richard Grey, was slain,
His lands then seized on by the conqueror:
Her suit is now to repossess those lands;
