Which we in justice cannot well deny,
Because in quarrel of the house of York
The worthy gentleman did lose his life.
Your highness shall do well to grant her suit;
It were dishonour to deny it her.
It were no less; but yet Ill make a pause.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Yea, is it so?
I see the lady hath a thing to grant,
Before the king will grant her humble suit.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  He knows the game: how true
he keeps the wind!
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Silence!
Widow, we will consider of your suit;
And come some other time to know our mind.
Right gracious lord, I cannot brook delay:
May it please your highness to resolve me now;
And what your pleasure is, shall satisfy me.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Ay, widow? then Ill warrant
you all your lands,
An if what pleases him shall pleasure you.
Fight closer, or, good faith, youll catch a blow.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  I fear her not, unless she
chance to fall.
[Aside to CLARENCE] God forbid that! for hell
take vantages.
How many children hast thou, widow? tell me.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  I think he means to beg a
child of her.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Nay, whip me then: hell rather
give her two.
Three, my most gracious lord.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  You shall have four, if youll
be ruled by him.
Twere pity they should lose their fathers lands.
Be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.
Lords, give us leave: Ill try this widows wit.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  Ay, good leave have you; for
you will have leave,
Till youth take leave and leave you to the crutch.
GLOUCESTER and CLARENCE retire
Now tell me, madam, do you love your children?
Ay, full as dearly as I love myself.
And would you not do much to do them good?
To do them good, I would sustain some harm.
Then get your husbands lands, to do them good.
Therefore I came unto your majesty.
Ill tell you how these lands are to be got.
So shall you bind me to your highness service.
What service wilt thou do me, if I give them?
What you command, that rests in me to do.
But you will take exceptions to my boon.
No, gracious lord, except I cannot do it.
Ay, but thou canst do what I mean to ask.
Why, then I will do what your grace commands.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  He plies her hard; and much rain
wears the marble.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  As red as fire! nay, then
her wax must melt.
Why stops my lord, shall I not hear my task?
An easy task; tis but to love a king.
Thats soon performd, because I am a subject.
Why, then, thy husbands lands I freely give thee.
I take my leave with many thousand thanks.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  The match is made; she seals it
with a curtsy.
But stay thee, tis the fruits of love I mean.
The fruits of love I mean, my loving liege.
Ay, but, I fear me, in another sense.
What love, thinkst thou, I sue so much to get?
My love till death, my humble thanks, my prayers;
That love which virtue begs and virtue grants.
No, by my troth, I did not mean such love.
Why, then you mean not as I thought you did.
But now you partly may perceive my mind.
My mind will never grant what I perceive
Your highness aims at, if I aim aright.
To tell thee plain, I aim to lie with thee.
To tell you plain, I had rather lie in prison.
Why, then thou shalt not have thy husbands lands.
Why, then mine honesty shall be my dower;
For by that loss I will not purchase them.
Therein thou wrongst thy children mightily.
Herein your highness wrongs both them and me.
But, mighty lord, this merry inclination
Accords not with the sadness of my suit:
Please you dismiss me either with ay or no.
Ay, if thou wilt say ay to my request;
No if thou dost say no to my demand.
Then, no, my lord. My suit is at an end.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  The widow likes him not, she
knits her brows.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  He is the bluntest wooer in
Christendom.
[Aside]  Her looks do argue her replete with modesty;
Her words do show her wit incomparable;
All her perfections challenge sovereignty:
One way or other, she is for a king;
And she shall be my love, or else my queen.--
Say that King Edward take thee for his queen?
Tis better said than done, my gracious lord:
I am a subject fit to jest withal,
But far unfit to be a sovereign.
Sweet widow, by my state I swear to thee
I speak no more than what my soul intends;
And that is, to enjoy thee for my love.
And that is more than I will yield unto:
I know I am too mean to be your queen,
And yet too good to be your concubine.
You cavil, widow: I did mean, my queen.
Twill grieve your grace my sons should call you father.
No more than when my daughters call thee mother.
Thou art a widow, and thou hast some children;
And, by Gods mother, I, being but a bachelor,
Have other some: why, tis a happy thing
To be the father unto many sons.
Answer no more, for thou shalt be my queen.
[Aside to CLARENCE]  The ghostly father now hath done
his shrift.
[Aside to GLOUCESTER]  When he was made a shriver,
twas for shift.
Brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.
The widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
Youll think it strange if I should marry her.
To whom, my lord?
Why, Clarence, to myself.
That would be ten days wonder at the least.
Thats a day longer than a wonder lasts.
By so much is the wonder in extremes.
Well, jest on, brothers: I can tell you both
Her suit is granted for her husbands lands.
Enter a Nobleman
My gracious lord, Henry your foe is taken,
And brought your prisoner to your palace gate.
See that he be conveyd unto the Tower:
And go we, brothers, to the man that took him,
To question of his apprehension.
Widow, go you along. Lords, use her honourably.
Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
Ay, Edward will use women honourably.
Would he were wasted, marrow, bones and all,
That from his loins no hopeful branch may spring,
To cross me from the golden time I look for!
And yet, between my souls desire and me--
The lustful Edwards title buried--
Is Clarence, Henry, and his son young Edward,
And all the unlookd for issue of their bodies,
To take their rooms, ere I can place myself:
A cold premeditation for my purpose!
Why, then, I do but dream on sovereignty;
Like one that stands upon a promontory,
And spies a far-off shore where he would tread,
Wishing his foot were equal with his eye,
And chides the sea that sunders him from thence,
Saying, hell lade it dry to have his way:
So do I wish the crown, being so far off;
And so I chide the means that keeps me from it;
And so I say, Ill cut the causes off,
Flattering me with impossibilities.
My eyes too quick, my heart oerweens too much,
Unless my hand and strength could equal them.
Well, say there is no kingdom then for Richard;
What other pleasure can the world afford?
Ill make my heaven in a ladys lap,
And deck my body in gay ornaments,
And witch sweet ladies with my words and looks.
O miserable thought! and more unlikely
Than to accomplish twenty golden crowns!
Why, love forswore me in my  mothers womb:
And, for I should not deal in her soft laws,
She did corrupt frail nature with some bribe,
To shrink mine arm up like a witherd shrub;
To make an envious mountain on my back,
Where sits deformity to mock my body;
To shape my legs of an unequal size;
To disproportion me in every part,
Like to a chaos, or an unlickd bear-whelp
That carries no impression like the dam.
And am I then a man to be beloved?
O monstrous fault, to harbour such a thought!
Then, since this earth affords no joy to me,
But to command, to cheque, to oerbear such
As are of better person than myself,
Ill make my heaven to dream upon the crown,
And, whiles I live, to account this world but hell,
Until my mis-shaped trunk that bears this head
Be round impaled with a glorious crown.
And yet I know not how to get the crown,
For many lives stand between me and home:
And I,--like one lost in a thorny wood,
That rends the thorns and is rent with the thorns,
Seeking a way and straying from the way;
Not knowing how to find the open air,
But toiling desperately to find it out,--
Torment myself to catch the English crown:
And from that torment I will free myself,
Or hew my way out with a bloody axe.
Why, I can smile, and murder whiles I smile,
And cry Content to that which grieves my heart,
And wet my cheeks with artificial tears,
And frame my face to all occasions.
Ill drown more sailors than the mermaid shall;
Ill slay more gazers than the basilisk;
Ill play the orator as well as Nestor,
Deceive more slily than Ulysses could,
And, like a Sinon, take another Troy.
I can add colours to the chameleon,
Change shapes with Proteus for advantages,
And set the murderous Machiavel to school.
Can I do this, and cannot get a crown?
Tut, were it farther off, Ill pluck it down.
Exit
SCENE III. France. KING LEWIS XIs palace.
Flourish. Enter KING LEWIS XI, his sister BONA,  his Admiral, called BOURBON, PRINCE EDWARD, QUEEN  MARGARET, and OXFORD. KING LEWIS XI sits, and riseth up again
Fair Queen of England, worthy Margaret,
Sit down with us: it ill befits thy state
And birth, that thou shouldst stand while Lewis doth sit.
No, mighty King of France: now Margaret
Must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve
Where kings command. I was, I must confess,
Great Albions queen in former golden days:
But now mischance hath trod my title down,
And with dishonour laid me on the ground;
Where I must take like seat unto my fortune,
And to my humble seat conform myself.
Why, say, fair queen, whence springs this deep despair?
From such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears
And stops my tongue, while heart is drownd in cares.
Whateer it be, be thou still like thyself,
And sit thee by our side:
Seats her by him
Yield not thy neck
To fortunes yoke, but let thy dauntless mind
Still ride in triumph over all mischance.
Be plain, Queen Margaret, and tell thy grief;
It shall be eased, if France can yield relief.
Those gracious words revive my drooping thoughts
And give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak.
Now, therefore, be it known to noble Lewis,
That Henry, sole possessor of my love,
Is of a king become a banishd man,
And forced to live in Scotland a forlorn;
While proud ambitious Edward Duke of York
Usurps the regal title and the seat
Of Englands true-anointed lawful king.
This is the cause that I, poor Margaret,
With this my son, Prince Edward, Henrys heir,
Am come to crave thy just and lawful aid;
And if thou fail us, all our hope is done:
Scotland hath will to help, but cannot help;
Our people and our peers are both misled,
Our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight,
And, as thou seest, ourselves in heavy plight.
Renowned queen, with patience calm the storm,
While we bethink a means to break it off.
The more we stay, the stronger grows our foe.
The more I stay, the more Ill succor thee.
O, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow.
And see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!
Enter WARWICK
Whats he approacheth boldly to our presence?
Our Earl of Warwick, Edwards greatest friend.
Welcome, brave Warwick! What brings thee to France?
He descends. She ariseth
Ay, now begins a second storm to rise;
For this is he that moves both wind and tide.
From worthy Edward, King of Albion,
My lord and sovereign, and thy vowed friend,
I come, in kindness and unfeigned love,
First, to do greetings to thy royal person;
And then to crave a league of amity;
And lastly, to confirm that amity
With a nuptial knot, if thou vouchsafe to grant
That virtuous Lady Bona, thy fair sister,
To Englands king in lawful marriage.
[Aside]  If that go forward, Henrys hope is done.
[To BONA]  And, gracious madam, in our kings behalf,
I am commanded, with your leave and favour,
Humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue
To tell the passion of my sovereigns heart;
Where fame, late entering at his heedful ears,
Hath placed thy beautys image and thy virtue.
King Lewis and Lady Bona, hear me speak,
Before you answer Warwick. His demand
Springs not from Edwards well-meant honest love,
But from deceit bred by necessity;
For how can tyrants safely govern home,
Unless abroad they purchase great alliance?
To prove him tyrant this reason may suffice,
That Henry liveth still: but were he dead,
Yet here Prince Edward stands, King Henrys son.
Look, therefore, Lewis, that by this league and marriage
Thou draw not on thy danger and dishonour;
For though usurpers sway the rule awhile,
Yet heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.
Injurious Margaret!
And why not queen?
Because thy father Henry did usurp;
And thou no more are prince than she is queen.
Then Warwick disannuls great John of Gaunt,
Which did subdue the greatest part of Spain;
And, after John of Gaunt, Henry the Fourth,
Whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest;
And, after that wise prince, Henry the Fifth,
Who by his prowess conquered all France:
From these our Henry lineally descends.
Oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse,
You told not how Henry the Sixth hath lost
All that which Henry Fifth had gotten?
Methinks these peers of France should smile at that.
But for the rest, you tell a pedigree
Of threescore and two years; a silly time
To make prescription for a kingdoms worth.
Why, Warwick, canst thou speak against thy liege,
Whom thou obeyedst thirty and six years,
And not bewray thy treason with a blush?
Can Oxford, that did ever fence the right,
Now buckler falsehood with a pedigree?
For shame! leave Henry, and call Edward king.
Call him my king by whose injurious doom
My elder brother, the Lord Aubrey Vere,
Was done to death? and more than so, my father,
Even in the downfall of his mellowd years,
When nature brought him to the door of death?
No, Warwick, no; while life upholds this arm,
This arm upholds the house of Lancaster.
And I the house of York.
Queen Margaret, Prince Edward, and Oxford,
Vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside,
While I use further conference with Warwick.
They stand aloof
Heavens grant that Warwicks words bewitch him not!
Now Warwick, tell me, even upon thy conscience,
Is Edward your true king? for I were loath
To link with him that were not lawful chosen.
Thereon I pawn my credit and mine honour.
But is he gracious in the peoples eye?
The more that Henry was unfortunate.
Then further, all dissembling set aside,
Tell me for truth the measure of his love
Unto our sister Bona.
Such it seems
As may beseem a monarch like himself.
Myself have often heard him say and swear
That this his love was an eternal plant,
Whereof the root was fixd in virtues ground,
The leaves and fruit maintaind with beautys sun,
Exempt from envy, but not from disdain,
Unless the Lady Bona quit his pain.
Now, sister, let us hear your firm resolve.
Your grant, or your denial, shall be mine:
To WARWICK
Yet I confess that often ere this day,
When I have heard your kings desert recounted,
Mine ear hath tempted judgment to desire.
Then, Warwick, thus: our sister shall be Edwards;
And now forthwith shall articles be drawn
Touching the jointure that your king must make,
Which with her dowry shall be counterpoised.
Draw near, Queen Margaret, and be a witness
That Bona shall be wife to the English king.
To Edward, but not to the English king.
Deceitful Warwick! it was thy device
By this alliance to make void my suit:
Before thy coming Lewis was Henrys friend.
And still is friend to him and Margaret:
But if your title to the crown be weak,
As may appear by Edwards good success,
Then tis but reason that I be released
From giving aid which late I promised.
Yet shall you have all kindness at my hand
That your estate requires and mine can yield.
Henry now lives in Scotland at his ease,
Where having nothing, nothing can he lose.
And as for you yourself, our quondam queen,
You have a father able to maintain you;
And better twere you troubled him than France.
Peace, impudent and shameless Warwick, peace,
Proud setter up and puller down of kings!
I will not hence, till, with my talk and tears,
Both full of truth, I make King Lewis behold
Thy sly conveyance and thy lords false love;
For both of you are birds of selfsame feather.
Post blows a horn within
Warwick, this is some post to us or thee.
Enter a Post
[To WARWICK]  My lord ambassador, these letters are for you,
Sent from your brother, Marquess Montague:
To KING LEWIS XI
These from our king unto your majesty:
To QUEEN MARGARET
And, madam, these for you; from whom I know not.
They all read their letters
I like it well that our fair queen and mistress
Smiles at her news, while Warwick frowns at his.
Nay, mark how Lewis stamps, as he were nettled:
I hope alls for the best.
Warwick, what are thy news? and yours, fair queen?
Mine, such as fill my heart with unhoped joys.
Mine, full of sorrow and hearts discontent.
What! has your king married the Lady Grey!
And now, to soothe your forgery and his,
Sends me a paper to persuade me patience?
Is this the alliance that he seeks with France?
Dare he presume to scorn us in this manner?
I told your majesty as much before:
This proveth Edwards love and Warwicks honesty.
King Lewis, I here protest, in sight of heaven,
And by the hope I have of heavenly bliss,
That I am clear from this misdeed of Edwards,
No more my king, for he dishonours me,
But most himself, if he could see his shame.
Did I forget that by the house of York
My father came untimely to his death?
Did I let pass the abuse done to my niece?
Did I impale him with the regal crown?
Did I put Henry from his native right?
And am I guerdond at the last with shame?
Shame on himself! for my desert is honour:
And to repair my honour lost for him,
I here renounce him and return to Henry.
My noble queen, let former grudges pass,
And henceforth I am thy true servitor:
I will revenge his wrong to Lady Bona,
And replant Henry in his former state.
Warwick, these words have turnd my hate to love;
And I forgive and quite forget old faults,
And joy that thou becomest King Henrys friend.
So much his friend, ay, his unfeigned friend,
That, if King Lewis vouchsafe to furnish us
With some few bands of chosen soldiers,
Ill undertake to land them on our coast
And force the tyrant from his seat by war.
Tis not his new-made bride shall succor him:
And as for Clarence, as my letters tell me,
Hes very likely now to fall from him,
For matching more for wanton lust than honour,
Or than for strength and safety of our country.
Dear brother, how shall Bona be revenged
But by thy help to this distressed queen?
Renowned prince, how shall poor Henry live,
Unless thou rescue him from foul despair?
My quarrel and this English queens are one.
And mine, fair lady Bona, joins with yours.
And mine with hers, and thine, and Margarets.
Therefore at last I firmly am resolved
You shall have aid.
Let me give humble thanks for all at once.
Then, Englands messenger, return in post,
And tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride:
Thou seest whats past, go fear thy king withal.
Tell him, in hope hell prove a widower shortly,
Ill wear the willow garland for his sake.
Tell him, my mourning weeds are laid aside,
And I am ready to put armour on.
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore Ill uncrown him eret be long.
Theres thy reward: be gone.
Exit Post
But, Warwick,
Thou and Oxford, with five thousand men,
Shall cross the seas, and bid false Edward battle;
And, as occasion serves, this noble queen
And prince shall follow with a fresh supply.
Yet, ere thou go, but answer me one doubt,
What pledge have we of thy firm loyalty?
This shall assure my constant loyalty,
That if our queen and this young prince agree,
Ill join mine eldest daughter and my joy
To him forthwith in holy wedlock bands.
Yes, I agree, and thank you for your motion.
Son Edward, she is fair and virtuous,
Therefore delay not, give thy hand to Warwick;
And, with thy hand, thy faith irrevocable,
That only Warwicks daughter shall be thine.
Yes, I accept her, for she well deserves it;
And here, to pledge my vow, I give my hand.
He gives his hand to WARWICK
Why stay we now? These soldiers shall be levied,
And thou, Lord Bourbon, our high admiral,
Shalt waft them over with our royal fleet.
I long till Edward fall by wars mischance,
For mocking marriage with a dame of France.
Exeunt all but WARWICK
I came from Edward as ambassador,
But I return his sworn and mortal foe:
Matter of marriage was the charge he gave me,
But dreadful war shall answer his demand.
Had he none else to make a stale but me?
Then none but I shall turn his jest to sorrow.
I was the chief that raised him to the crown,
And Ill be chief to bring him down again:
Not that I pity Henrys misery,
But seek revenge on Edwards mockery.
Exit
ACT IV
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Enter GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, SOMERSET, and MONTAGUE
Now tell me, brother Clarence, what think you
Of this new marriage with the Lady Grey?
Hath not our brother made a worthy choice?
Alas, you know, tis far from hence to France;
How could he stay till Warwick made return?
My lords, forbear this talk; here comes the king.
And his well-chosen bride.
I mind to tell him plainly what I think.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, attended; QUEEN ELIZABETH, PEMBROKE, STAFFORD, HASTINGS, and others
Now, brother of Clarence, how like you our choice,
That you stand pensive, as half malcontent?
As well as Lewis of France, or the Earl of Warwick,
Which are so weak of courage and in judgment
That theyll take no offence at our abuse.
Suppose they take offence without a cause,
They are but Lewis and Warwick: I am Edward,
Your king and Warwicks, and must have my will.
And shall have your will, because our king:
Yet hasty marriage seldom proveth well.
Yea, brother Richard, are you offended too?
Not I:
No, God forbid that I should wish them severd
Whom God hath joind together; ay, and twere pity
To sunder them that yoke so well together.
Setting your scorns and your mislike aside,
Tell me some reason why the Lady Grey
Should not become my wife and Englands queen.
And you too, Somerset and Montague,
Speak freely what you think.
Then this is mine opinion: that King Lewis
Becomes your enemy, for mocking him
About the marriage of the Lady Bona.
And Warwick, doing what you gave in charge,
Is now dishonoured by this new marriage.
What if both Lewis and Warwick be appeased
By such invention as I can devise?
Yet, to have joind with France in such alliance
Would more have strengthend this our commonwealth
Gainst foreign storms than any home-bred marriage.
Why, knows not Montague that of itself
England is safe, if true within itself?
But the safer when tis backd with France.
Tis better using France than trusting France:
Let us be backd with God and with the seas
Which He hath given for fence impregnable,
And with their helps only defend ourselves;
In them and in ourselves our safety lies.
For this one speech Lord Hastings well deserves
To have the heir of the Lord Hungerford.
Ay, what of that? it was my will and grant;
And for this once my will shall stand for law.
And yet methinks your grace hath not done well,
To give the heir and daughter of Lord Scales
Unto the brother of your loving bride;
She better would have fitted me or Clarence:
But in your bride you bury brotherhood.
Or else you would not have bestowd the heir
Of the Lord Bonville on your new wifes son,
And leave your brothers to go speed elsewhere.
Alas, poor Clarence! is it for a wife
That thou art malcontent? I will provide thee.
In choosing for yourself, you showd your judgment,
Which being shallow, you give me leave
To play the broker in mine own behalf;
And to that end I shortly mind to leave you.
Leave me, or tarry, Edward will be king,
And not be tied unto his brothers will.
My lords, before it pleased his majesty
To raise my state to title of a queen,
Do me but right, and you must all confess
That I was not ignoble of descent;
And meaner than myself have had like fortune.
But as this title honours me and mine,
So your dislike, to whom I would be pleasing,
Doth cloud my joys with danger and with sorrow.
My love, forbear to fawn upon their frowns:
What danger or what sorrow can befall thee,
So long as Edward is thy constant friend,
And their true sovereign, whom they must obey?
Nay, whom they shall obey, and love thee too,
Unless they seek for hatred at my hands;
Which if they do, yet will I keep thee safe,
And they shall feel the vengeance of my wrath.
[Aside]  I hear, yet say not much, but think the more.
Enter a Post
Now, messenger, what letters or what news
From France?
My sovereign liege, no letters; and few words,
But such as I, without your special pardon,
Dare not relate.
Go to, we pardon thee: therefore, in brief,
Tell me their words as near as thou canst guess them.
What answer makes King Lewis unto our letters?
At my depart, these were his very words:
Go tell false Edward, thy supposed king,
That Lewis of France is sending over masquers
To revel it with him and his new bride.
Is Lewis so brave? belike he thinks me Henry.
But what said Lady Bona to my marriage?
These were her words, utterd with mad disdain:
Tell him, in hope hell prove a widower shortly,
Ill wear the willow garland for his sake.
I blame not her, she could say little less;
She had the wrong. But what said Henrys queen?
For I have heard that she was there in place.
Tell him, quoth she, my mourning weeds are done,
And I am ready to put armour on.
Belike she minds to play the Amazon.
But what said Warwick to these injuries?
He, more incensed against your majesty
Than all the rest, discharged me with these words:
Tell him from me that he hath done me wrong,
And therefore Ill uncrown him eret be long.
Ha! durst the traitor breathe out so proud words?
Well I will arm me, being thus forewarnd:
They shall have wars and pay for their presumption.
But say, is Warwick friends with Margaret?
Ay, gracious sovereign; they are so linkd in
friendship
That young Prince Edward marries Warwicks daughter.
Belike the elder; Clarence will have the younger.
Now, brother king, farewell, and sit you fast,
For I will hence to Warwicks other daughter;
That, though I want a kingdom, yet in marriage
I may not prove inferior to yourself.
You that love me and Warwick, follow me.
Exit CLARENCE, and SOMERSET follows
[Aside]  Not I:
My thoughts aim at a further matter; I
Stay not for the love of Edward, but the crown.
Clarence and Somerset both gone to Warwick!
Yet am I armd against the worst can happen;
And haste is needful in this desperate case.
Pembroke and Stafford, you in our behalf
Go levy men, and make prepare for war;
They are already, or quickly will be landed:
Myself in person will straight follow you.
Exeunt PEMBROKE and STAFFORD
But, ere I go, Hastings and Montague,
Resolve my doubt. You twain, of all the rest,
Are near to Warwick by blood and by alliance:
Tell me if you love Warwick more than me?
If it be so, then both depart to him;
I rather wish you foes than hollow friends:
But if you mind to hold your true obedience,
Give me assurance with some friendly vow,
That I may never have you in suspect.
So God help Montague as he proves true!
And Hastings as he favours Edwards cause!
Now, brother Richard, will you stand by us?
Ay, in despite of all that shall withstand you.
Why, so! then am I sure of victory.
Now therefore let us hence; and lose no hour,
Till we meet Warwick with his foreign power.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A plain in Warwickshire.
Enter WARWICK and OXFORD, with French soldiers
Trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well;
The common people by numbers swarm to us.
Enter CLARENCE and SOMERSET
But see where Somerset and Clarence come!
Speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends?
Fear not that, my lord.
Then, gentle Clarence, welcome unto Warwick;
And welcome, Somerset: I hold it cowardice
To rest mistrustful where a noble heart
Hath pawnd an open hand in sign of love;
Else might I think that Clarence, Edwards brother,
Were but a feigned friend to our proceedings:
But welcome, sweet Clarence; my daughter shall be thine.
And now what rests but, in nights coverture,
Thy brother being carelessly encampd,
His soldiers lurking in the towns about,
And but attended by a simple guard,
We may surprise and take him at our pleasure?
Our scouts have found the adventure very easy:
That as Ulysses and stout Diomede
With sleight and manhood stole to Rhesus tents,
And brought from thence the Thracian fatal steeds,
So we, well coverd with the nights black mantle,
At unawares may beat down Edwards guard
And seize himself; I say not, slaughter him,
For I intend but only to surprise him.
You that will follow me to this attempt,
Applaud the name of Henry with your leader.
They all cry, Henry!
Why, then, lets on our way in silent sort:
For Warwick and his friends, God and Saint George!
Exeunt
SCENE III. Edwards camp, near Warwick.
Enter three Watchmen, to guard KING EDWARD IVs tent
Come on, my masters, each man take his stand:
The king by this is set him down to sleep.
What, will he not to bed?
Why, no; for he hath made a solemn vow
Never to lie and take his natural rest
Till Warwick or himself be quite suppressd.
To-morrow then belike shall be the day,
If Warwick be so near as men report.
But say, I pray, what nobleman is that
That with the king here resteth in his tent?
Tis the Lord Hastings, the kings chiefest friend.
O, is it so? But why commands the king
That his chief followers lodge in towns about him,
While he himself keeps in the cold field?
Tis the more honour, because more dangerous.
Ay, but give me worship and quietness;
I like it better than a dangerous honour.
If Warwick knew in what estate he stands,
Tis to be doubted he would waken him.
Unless our halberds did shut up his passage.
Ay, wherefore else guard we his royal tent,
But to defend his person from night-foes?
Enter WARWICK, CLARENCE, OXFORD, SOMERSET, and French soldiers, silent all
This is his tent; and see where stand his guard.
Courage, my masters! honour now or never!
But follow me, and Edward shall be ours.
Who goes there?
Stay, or thou diest!
WARWICK and the rest cry all, Warwick! Warwick!  and set upon the Guard, who fly, crying, Arm! arm! WARWICK and the rest following them
The drum playing and trumpet sounding, reenter  WARWICK, SOMERSET, and the rest, bringing KING  EDWARD IV out in his gown, sitting in a chair. RICHARD and HASTINGS fly over the stage
What are they that fly there?
Richard and Hastings: let them go; here is The duke.
The duke! Why, Warwick, when we parted,
Thou calldst me king.
Ay, but the case is alterd:
When you disgraced me in my embassade,
Then I degraded you from being king,
And come now to create you Duke of York.
Alas! how should you govern any kingdom,
That know not how to use ambassadors,
Nor how to be contented with one wife,
Nor how to use your brothers brotherly,
Nor how to study for the peoples welfare,
Nor how to shroud yourself from enemies?
Yea, brother of Clarence, are thou here too?
Nay, then I see that Edward needs must down.
Yet, Warwick, in despite of all mischance,
Of thee thyself and all thy complices,
Edward will always bear himself as king:
Though fortunes malice overthrow my state,
My mind exceeds the compass of her wheel.
Then, for his mind, be Edward Englands king:
Takes off his crown
But Henry now shall wear the English crown,
And be true king indeed, thou but the shadow.
My Lord of Somerset, at my request,
See that forthwith Duke Edward be conveyd
Unto my brother, Archbishop of York.
When I have fought with Pembroke and his fellows,
Ill follow you, and tell what answer
Lewis and the Lady Bona send to him.
Now, for a while farewell, good Duke of York.
They lead him out forcibly
What fates impose, that men must needs abide;
It boots not to resist both wind and tide.
Exit, guarded
What now remains, my lords, for us to do
But march to London with our soldiers?
Ay, thats the first thing that we have to do;
To free King Henry from imprisonment
And see him seated in the regal throne.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. London. The palace.
Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH and RIVERS
Madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
Why brother Rivers, are you yet to learn
What late misfortune is befalln King Edward?
What! loss of some pitchd battle against Warwick?
No, but the loss of his own royal person.
Then is my sovereign slain?
Ay, almost slain, for he is taken prisoner,
Either betrayd by falsehood of his guard
Or by his foe surprised at unawares:
And, as I further have to understand,
Is new committed to the Bishop of York,
Fell Warwicks brother and by that our foe.
These news I must confess are full of grief;
Yet, gracious madam, bear it as you may:
Warwick may lose, that now hath won the day.
Till then fair hope must hinder lifes decay.
And I the rather wean me from despair
For love of Edwards offspring in my womb:
This is it that makes me bridle passion
And bear with mildness my misfortunes cross;
Ay, ay, for this I draw in many a tear
And stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs,
Lest with my sighs or tears I blast or drown
King Edwards fruit, true heir to the English crown.
But, madam, where is Warwick then become?
I am informd that he comes towards London,
To set the crown once more on Henrys head:
Guess thou the rest; King Edwards friends must down,
But, to prevent the tyrants violence,--
For trust not him that hath once broken faith,--
Ill hence forthwith unto the sanctuary,
To save at least the heir of Edwards right:
There shall I rest secure from force and fraud.
Come, therefore, let us fly while we may fly:
If Warwick take us we are sure to die.
Exeunt
SCENE V. A park near Middleham Castle In Yorkshire.
Enter GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and STANLEY
Now, my Lord Hastings and Sir William Stanley,
Leave off to wonder why I drew you hither,
Into this chiefest thicket of the park.
Thus stands the case: you know our king, my brother,
Is prisoner to the bishop here, at whose hands
He hath good usage and great liberty,
And, often but attended with weak guard,
Comes hunting this way to disport himself.
I have advertised him by secret means
That if about this hour he make his way
Under the colour of his usual game,
He shall here find his friends with horse and men
To set him free from his captivity.
Enter KING EDWARD IV and a Huntsman with him
This way, my lord; for this way lies the game.
Nay, this way, man: see where the huntsmen stand.
Now, brother of Gloucester, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Stand you thus close, to steal the bishops deer?
Brother, the time and case requireth haste:
Your horse stands ready at the park-corner.
But whither shall we then?
To Lynn, my lord,
And ship from thence to Flanders.
Well guessd, believe me; for that was my meaning.
Stanley, I will requite thy forwardness.
But wherefore stay we? tis no time to talk.
Huntsman, what sayst thou? wilt thou go along?
Better do so than tarry and be hangd.
Come then, away; lets ha no more ado.
Bishop, farewell: shield thee from Warwicks frown;
And pray that I may repossess the crown.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. London. The Tower.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, CLARENCE, WARWICK,  SOMERSET, HENRY OF RICHMOND, OXFORD, MONTAGUE, and Lieutenant of the Tower
Master lieutenant, now that God and friends
Have shaken Edward from the regal seat,
And turnd my captive state to liberty,
My fear to hope, my sorrows unto joys,
At our enlargement what are thy due fees?
Subjects may challenge nothing of their sovereigns;
But if an humble prayer may prevail,
I then crave pardon of your majesty.
For what, lieutenant? for well using me?
Nay, be thou sure Ill well requite thy kindness,
For that it made my imprisonment a pleasure;
Ay, such a pleasure as incaged birds
Conceive when after many moody thoughts
At last by notes of household harmony
They quite forget their loss of liberty.
But, Warwick, after God, thou setst me free,
And chiefly therefore I thank God and thee;
He was the author, thou the instrument.
Therefore, that I may conquer fortunes spite
By living low, where fortune cannot hurt me,
And that the people of this blessed land
May not be punishd with my thwarting stars,
Warwick, although my head still wear the crown,
I here resign my government to thee,
For thou art fortunate in all thy deeds.
Your grace hath still been famed for virtuous;
And now may seem as wise as virtuous,
By spying and avoiding fortunes malice,
For few men rightly temper with the stars:
Yet in this one thing let me blame your grace,
For choosing me when Clarence is in place.
No, Warwick, thou art worthy of the sway,
To whom the heavens in thy nativity
Adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown,
As likely to be blest in peace and war;
And therefore I yield thee my free consent.
And I choose Clarence only for protector.
Warwick and Clarence give me both your hands:
Now join your hands, and with your hands your hearts,
That no dissension hinder government:
I make you both protectors of this land,
While I myself will lead a private life
And in devotion spend my latter days,
To sins rebuke and my Creators praise.
What answers Clarence to his sovereigns will?
That he consents, if Warwick yield consent;
For on thy fortune I repose myself.
Why, then, though loath, yet must I be content:
Well yoke together, like a double shadow
To Henrys body, and supply his place;
I mean, in bearing weight of government,
While he enjoys the honour and his ease.
And, Clarence, now then it is more than needful
Forthwith that Edward be pronounced a traitor,
And all his lands and goods be confiscate.
What else? and that succession be determined.
Ay, therein Clarence shall not want his part.
But, with the first of all your chief affairs,
Let me entreat, for I command no more,
That Margaret your queen and my son Edward
Be sent for, to return from France with speed;
For, till I see them here, by doubtful fear
My joy of liberty is half eclipsed.
It shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.
My Lord of Somerset, what youth is that,
Of whom you seem to have so tender care?
My liege, it is young Henry, earl of Richmond.
Come hither, Englands hope.
Lays his hand on his head
If secret powers
Suggest but truth to my divining thoughts,
This pretty lad will prove our countrys bliss.
His looks are full of peaceful majesty,
His head by nature framed to wear a crown,
His hand to wield a sceptre, and himself
Likely in time to bless a regal throne.
Make much of him, my lords, for this is he
Must help you more than you are hurt by me.
Enter a Post
What news, my friend?
That Edward is escaped from your brother,
And fled, as he hears since, to Burgundy.
Unsavoury news! but how made he escape?
He was conveyd by Richard Duke of Gloucester
And the Lord Hastings, who attended him
In secret ambush on the forest side
And from the bishops huntsmen rescued him;
For hunting was his daily exercise.
My brother was too careless of his charge.
But let us hence, my sovereign, to provide
A salve for any sore that may betide.
Exeunt all but SOMERSET, HENRY OF RICHMOND, and OXFORD
My lord, I like not of this flight of Edwards;
For doubtless Burgundy will yield him help,
And we shall have more wars before t be long.
As Henrys late presaging prophecy
Did glad my heart with hope of this young Richmond,
So doth my heart misgive me, in these conflicts
What may befall him, to his harm and ours:
Therefore, Lord Oxford, to prevent the worst,
Forthwith well send him hence to Brittany,
Till storms be past of civil enmity.
Ay, for if Edward repossess the crown,
Tis like that Richmond with the rest shall down.
It shall be so; he shall to Brittany.
Come, therefore, lets about it speedily.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Before York.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, and Soldiers
Now, brother Richard, Lord Hastings, and the rest,
Yet thus far fortune maketh us amends,
And says that once more I shall interchange
My waned state for Henrys regal crown.
Well have we passd and now repassd the seas
And brought desired help from Burgundy:
What then remains, we being thus arrived
From Ravenspurgh haven before the gates of York,
But that we enter, as into our dukedom?
The gates made fast! Brother, I like not this;
For many men that stumble at the threshold
Are well foretold that danger lurks within.
Tush, man, abodements must not now affright us:
By fair or foul means we must enter in,
For hither will our friends repair to us.
My liege, Ill knock once more to summon them.
Enter, on the walls, the Mayor of York, and his Brethren
My lords, we were forewarned of your coming,
And shut the gates for safety of ourselves;
For now we owe allegiance unto Henry.
But, master mayor, if Henry be your king,
Yet Edward at the least is Duke of York.
True, my good lord; I know you for no less.
Why, and I challenge nothing but my dukedom,
As being well content with that alone.
[Aside]  But when the fox hath once got in his nose,
Hell soon find means to make the body follow.
Why, master mayor, why stand you in a doubt?
Open the gates; we are King Henrys friends.
Ay, say you so? the gates shall then be opend.
They descend
A wise stout captain, and soon persuaded!
The good old man would fain that all were well,
So twere not long of him; but being enterd,
I doubt not, I, but we shall soon persuade
Both him and all his brothers unto reason.
Enter the Mayor and two Aldermen, below
So, master mayor: these gates must not be shut
But in the night or in the time of war.
What! fear not, man, but yield me up the keys;
Takes his keys
For Edward will defend the town and thee,
And all those friends that deign to follow me.
March. Enter MONTGOMERY, with drum and soldiers
Brother, this is Sir John Montgomery,
Our trusty friend, unless I be deceived.
Welcome, Sir John! But why come you in arms?
To help King Edward in his time of storm,
As every loyal subject ought to do.
Thanks, good Montgomery; but we now forget
Our title to the crown and only claim
Our dukedom till God please to send the rest.
Then fare you well, for I will hence again:
I came to serve a king and not a duke.
Drummer, strike up, and let us march away.
