The drum begins to march
Nay, stay, Sir John, awhi le, and well debate
By what safe means the crown may be recoverd.
What talk you of debating? in few words,
If youll not here proclaim yourself our king,
Ill leave you to your fortune and be gone
To keep them back that come to succor you:
Why shall we fight, if you pretend no title?
Why, brother, wherefore stand you on nice points?
When we grow stronger, then well make our claim:
Till then, tis wisdom to conceal our meaning.
Away with scrupulous wit! now arms must rule.
And fearless minds climb soonest unto crowns.
Brother, we will proclaim you out of hand:
The bruit thereof will bring you many friends.
Then be it as you will; for tis my right,
And Henry but usurps the diadem.
Ay, now my sovereign speaketh like himself;
And now will I be Edwards champion.
Sound trumpet; Edward shall be here proclaimd:
Come, fellow-soldier, make thou proclamation.
Flourish
Edward the Fourth, by the grace of God, king of
England and France, and lord of Ireland,  and c.
And whosoeer gainsays King Edwards right,
By this I challenge him to single fight.
Throws down his gauntlet
Long live Edward the Fourth!
Thanks, brave Montgomery; and thanks unto you all:
If fortune serve me, Ill requite this kindness.
Now, for this night, lets harbour here in York;
And when the morning sun shall raise his car
Above the border of this horizon,
Well forward towards Warwick and his mates;
For well I wot that Henry is no soldier.
Ah, froward Clarence! how evil it beseems thee
To flatter Henry and forsake thy brother!
Yet, as we may, well meet both thee and Warwick.
Come on, brave soldiers: doubt not of the day,
And, that once gotten, doubt not of large pay.
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. London. The palace.
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VI, WARWICK, MONTAGUE, CLARENCE, EXETER, and OXFORD
What counsel, lords? Edward from Belgia,
With hasty Germans and blunt Hollanders,
Hath passd in safety through the narrow seas,
And with his troops doth march amain to London;
And many giddy people flock to him.
Lets levy men, and beat him back again.
A little fire is quickly trodden out;
Which, being sufferd, rivers cannot quench.
In Warwickshire I have true-hearted friends,
Not mutinous in peace, yet bold in war;
Those will I muster up: and thou, son Clarence,
Shalt stir up in Suffolk, Norfolk, and in Kent,
The knights and gentlemen to come with thee:
Thou, brother Montague, in Buckingham,
Northampton and in Leicestershire, shalt find
Men well inclined to hear what thou commandst:
And thou, brave Oxford, wondrous well beloved,
In Oxfordshire shalt muster up thy friends.
My sovereign, with the loving citizens,
Like to his island girt in with the ocean,
Or modest Dian circled with her nymphs,
Shall rest in London till we come to him.
Fair lords, take leave and stand not to reply.
Farewell, my sovereign.
Farewell, my Hector, and my Troys true hope.
In sign of truth, I kiss your highness hand.
Well-minded Clarence, be thou fortunate!
Comfort, my lord; and so I take my leave.
And thus I seal my truth, and bid adieu.
Sweet Oxford, and my loving Montague,
And all at once, once more a happy farewell.
Farewell, sweet lords: lets meet at Coventry.
Exeunt all but KING HENRY VI and EXETER
Here at the palace I will rest awhile.
Cousin of Exeter, what thinks your lordship?
Methinks the power that Edward hath in field
Should not be able to encounter mine.
The doubt is that he will seduce the rest.
Thats not my fear; my meed hath got me fame:
I have not stoppd mine ears to their demands,
Nor posted off their suits with slow delays;
My pity hath been balm to heal their wounds,
My mildness hath allayd their swelling griefs,
My mercy dried their water-flowing tears;
I have not been desirous of their wealth,
Nor much oppressd them with great subsidies.
Nor forward of revenge, though they much errd:
Then why should they love Edward more than me?
No, Exeter, these graces challenge grace:
And when the lion fawns upon the lamb,
The lamb will never cease to follow him.
Shout within. A Lancaster! A Lancaster!
Hark, hark, my lord! what shouts are these?
Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, and soldiers
Seize on the shame-faced Henry, bear him hence;
And once again proclaim us King of England.
You are the fount that makes small brooks to flow:
Now stops thy spring; my sea sha$l suck them dry,
And swell so much the higher by their ebb.
Hence with him to the Tower; let him not speak.
Exeunt some with KING HENRY VI
And, lords, towards Coventry bend we our course
Where peremptory Warwick now remains:
The sun shines hot; and, if we use delay,
Cold biting winter mars our hoped-for hay.
Away betimes, before his forces join,
And take the great-grown traitor unawares:
Brave warriors, march amain towards Coventry.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Coventry.
Enter WARWICK, the Mayor of Coventry, two Messengers, and others upon the walls
Where is the post that came from valiant Oxford?
How far hence is thy lord, mine honest fellow?
By this at Dunsmore, marching hitherward.
How far off is our brother Montague?
Where is the post that came from Montague?
By this at Daintry, with a puissant troop.
Enter SIR JOHN SOMERVILLE
Say, Somerville, what says my loving son?
And, by thy guess, how nigh is Clarence now?
At Southam I did leave him with his forces,
And do expect him here some two hours hence.
Drum heard
Then Clarence is at hand, I hear his drum.
It is not his, my lord; here Southam lies:
The drum your honour hears marcheth from Warwick.
Who should that be? belike, unlookd-for friends.
They are at hand, and you shall quickly know.
March: flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, and soldiers
Go, trumpet, to the walls, and sound a parle.
See how the surly Warwick mans the wall!
O unbid spite! is sportful Edward come?
Where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced,
That we could hear no news of his repair?
Now, Warwick, wilt thou ope the city gates,
Speak gentle words and humbly bend thy knee,
Call Edward king and at his hands beg mercy?
And he shall pardon thee these outrages.
Nay, rather, wilt thou draw thy forces hence,
Confess who set thee up and pluckd thee own,
Call Warwick patron and be penitent?
And thou shalt still remain the Duke of York.
I thought, at least, he would have said the king;
Or did he make the jest against his will?
Is not a dukedom, sir, a goodly gift?
Ay, by my faith, for a poor earl to give:
Ill do thee service for so good a gift.
Twas I that gave the kingdom to thy brother.
Why then tis mine, if but by Warwicks gift.
Thou art no Atlas for so great a weight:
And weakling, Warwick takes his gift again;
And Henry is my king, Warwick his subject.
But Warwicks king is Edwards prisoner:
And, gallant Warwick, do but answer this:
What is the body when the head is off?
Alas, that Warwick had no more forecast,
But, whiles he thought to steal the single ten,
The king was slily fingerd from the deck!
You left poor Henry at the Bishops palace,
And, ten to one, youll meet him in the Tower.
Tis even so; yet you are Warwick still.
Come, Warwick, take the time; kneel down, kneel down:
Nay, when? strike now, or else the iron cools.
I had rather chop this hand off at a blow,
And with the other fling it at thy face,
Than bear so low a sail, to strike to thee.
Sail how thou canst, have wind and tide thy friend,
This hand, fast wound about thy coal-black hair
Shall, whiles thy head is warm and new cut off,
Write in the dust this sentence with thy blood,
Wind-changing Warwick now can change no more.
Enter OXFORD, with drum and colours
O cheerful colours! see where Oxford comes!
Oxford, Oxford, for Lancaster!
He and his forces enter the city
The gates are open, let us enter too.
So other foes may set upon our backs.
Stand we in good array; for they no doubt
Will issue out again and bid us battle:
If not, the city being but of small defence,
Well quickly rouse the traitors in the same.
O, welcome, Oxford! for we want thy help.
Enter MONTAGUE with drum and colours
Montague, Montague, for Lancaster!
He and his forces enter the city
Thou and thy brother both shall buy this treason
Even with the dearest blood your bodies bear.
The harder matchd, the greater victory:
My mind presageth happy gain and conquest.
Enter SOMERSET, with drum and colours
Somerset, Somerset, for Lancaster!
He and his forces enter the city
Two of thy name, both Dukes of Somerset,
Have sold their lives unto the house of York;
And thou shalt be the third if this sword hold.
Enter CLARENCE, with drum and colours
And lo, where George of Clarence sweeps along,
Of force enough to bid his brother battle;
With whom an upright zeal to right prevails
More than the nature of a brothers love!
Come, Clarence, come; thou wilt, if Warwick call.
Father of Warwick, know you what this means?
Taking his red rose out of his hat
Look here, I throw my infamy at thee
I will not ruinate my fathers house,
Who gave his blood to lime the stones together,
And set up Lancaster. Why, trowst thou, Warwick,
That Clarence is so harsh, so blunt, unnatural,
To bend the fatal instruments of war
Against his brother and his lawful king?
Perhaps thou wilt object my holy oath:
To keep that oath were more impiety
Than Jephthahs, when he sacrificed his daughter.
I am so sorry for my trespass made
That, to deserve well at my brothers hands,
I here proclaim myself thy mortal foe,
With resolution, wheresoeer I meet thee--
As I will meet thee, if thou stir abroad--
To plague thee for thy foul misleading me.
And so, proud-hearted Warwick, I defy thee,
And to my brother turn my blushing cheeks.
Pardon me, Edward, I will make amends:
And, Richard, do not frown upon my faults,
For I will henceforth be no more unconstant.
Now welcome more, and ten times more beloved,
Than if thou never hadst deserved our hate.
Welcome, good Clarence; this is brotherlike.
O passing traitor, perjured and unjust!
What, Warwick, wilt thou leave the town and fight?
Or shall we beat the stones about thine ears?
Alas, I am not coopd here for defence!
I will away towards Barnet presently,
And bid thee battle, Edward, if thou darest.
Yes, Warwick, Edward dares, and leads the way.
Lords, to the field; Saint George and victory!
Exeunt King Edward and his company. March. Warwick and his company follow
SCENE II. A field of battle near Barnet.
Alarum and excursions. Enter KING EDWARD IV, bringing forth WARWICK wounded
So, lie thou there: die thou, and die our fear;
For Warwick was a bug that feard us all.
Now, Montague, sit fast; I seek for thee,
That Warwicks bones may keep thine company.
Exit
Ah, who is nigh? come to me, friend or foe,
And tell me who is victor, York or Warwick?
Why ask I that? my mangled body shows,
My blood, my want of strength, my sick heart shows.
That I must yield my body to the earth
And, by my fall, the conquest to my foe.
Thus yields the cedar to the axes edge,
Whose arms gave shelter to the princely eagle,
Under whose shade the ramping lion slept,
Whose top-branch overpeerd Joves spreading tree
And kept low shrubs from winters powerful wind.
These eyes, that now are dimmd with deaths black veil,
Have been as piercing as the mid-day sun,
To search the secret treasons of the world:
The wrinkles in my brows, now filled with blood,
Were likend oft to kingly sepulchres;
For who lived king, but I could dig his grave?
And who durst mine when Warwick bent his brow?
Lo, now my glory smeard in dust and blood!
My parks, my walks, my manors that I had.
Even now forsake me, and of all my lands
Is nothing left me but my bodys length.
Why, what is pomp, rule, reign, but earth and dust?
And, live we how we can, yet die we must.
Enter OXFORD and SOMERSET
Ah, Warwick, Warwick! wert thou as we are.
We might recover all our loss again;
The queen from France hath brought a puissant power:
Even now we heard the news: ah, couldst thou fly!
Why, then I would not fly. Ah, Montague,
If thou be there, sweet brother, take my hand.
And with thy lips keep in my soul awhile!
Thou lovest me not; for, brother, if thou didst,
Thy tears would wash this cold congealed blood
That glues my lips and will not let me speak.
Come quickly, Montague, or I am dead.
Ah, Warwick! Montague hath breathed his last;
And to the latest gasp cried out for Warwick,
And said Commend me to my valiant brother.
And more he would have said, and more he spoke,
Which sounded like a clamour in a vault,
That mought not be distinguished; but at last
I well might hear, delivered with a groan,
O, farewell, Warwick!
Sweet rest his soul! Fly, lords, and save yourselves;
For Warwick bids you all farewell to meet in heaven.
Dies
Away, away, to meet the queens great power!
Here they bear away his body. Exeunt
SCENE III. Another part of the field.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV in triumph; with GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and the rest
Thus far our fortune keeps an upward course,
And we are graced with wreaths of victory.
But, in the midst of this bright-shining day,
I spy a black, suspicious, threatening cloud,
That will encounter with our glorious sun,
Ere he attain his easeful western bed:
I mean, my lords, those powers that the queen
Hath raised in Gallia have arrived our coast
And, as we hear, march on to fight with us.
A little gale will soon disperse that cloud
And blow it to the source from whence it came:
The very beams will dry those vapours up,
For every cloud engenders not a storm.
The queen is valued thirty thousand strong,
And Somerset, with Oxford fled to her:
If she have time to breathe be well assured
Her faction will be full as strong as ours.
We are advertised by our loving friends
That they do hold their course toward Tewksbury:
We, having now the best at Barnet field,
Will thither straight, for willingness rids way;
And, as we march, our strength will be augmented
In every county as we go along.
Strike up the drum; cry Courage! and away.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Plains near Tewksbury.
March. Enter QUEEN MARGARET, PRINCE EDWARD, SOMERSET, OXFORD, and soldiers
Great lords, wise men neer sit and wail their loss,
But cheerly seek how to redress their harms.
What though the mast be now blown overboard,
The cable broke, the holding-anchor lost,
And half our sailors swallowd in the flood?
Yet lives our pilot still. Ist meet that he
Should leave the helm and like a fearful lad
With tearful eyes add water to the sea
And give more strength to that which hath too much,
Whiles, in his moan, the ship splits on the rock,
Which industry and courage might have saved?
Ah, what a shame! ah, what a fault were this!
Say Warwick was our anchor; what of that?
And Montague our topmost; what of him?
Our slaughterd friends the tackles; what of these?
Why, is not Oxford here another anchor?
And Somerset another goodly mast?
The friends of France our shrouds and tacklings?
And, though unskilful, why not Ned and I
For once allowd the skilful pilots charge?
We will not from the helm to sit and weep,
But keep our course, though the rough wind say no,
From shelves and rocks that threaten us with wreck.
As good to chide the waves as speak them fair.
And what is Edward but ruthless sea?
What Clarence but a quicksand of deceit?
And Richard but a ragged fatal rock?
All these the enemies to our poor bark.
Say you can swim; alas, tis but a while!
Tread on the sand; why, there you quickly sink:
Bestride the rock; the tide will wash you off,
Or else you famish; thats a threefold death.
This speak I, lords, to let you understand,
If case some one of you would fly from us,
That theres no hoped-for mercy with the brothers
More than with ruthless waves, with sands and rocks.
Why, courage then! what cannot be avoided
Twere childish weakness to lament or fear.
Methinks a woman of this valiant spirit
Should, if a coward heard her speak these words,
Infuse his breast with magnanimity
And make him, naked, foil a man at arms.
I speak not this as doubting any here
For did I but suspect a fearful man
He should have leave to go away betimes,
Lest in our need he might infect another
And make him of like spirit to himself.
If any such be here--as God forbid!--
Let him depart before we need his help.
Women and children of so high a courage,
And warriors faint! why, twere perpetual shame.
O brave young prince! thy famous grandfather
Doth live again in thee: long mayst thou live
To bear his image and renew his glories!
And he that will not fight for such a hope.
Go home to bed, and like the owl by day,
If he arise, be mockd and wonderd at.
Thanks, gentle Somerset; sweet Oxford, thanks.
And take his thanks that yet hath nothing else.
Enter a Messenger
Prepare you, lords, for Edward is at hand.
Ready to fight; therefore be resolute.
I thought no less: it is his policy
To haste thus fast, to find us unprovided.
But hes deceived; we are in readiness.
This cheers my heart, to see your forwardness.
Here pitch our battle; hence we will not budge.
Flourish and march. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE, and soldiers
Brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood,
Which, by the heavens assistance and your strength,
Must by the roots be hewn up yet ere night.
I need not add more fuel to your fire,
For well I wot ye blaze to burn them out
Give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!
Lords, knights, and gentlemen, what I should say
My tears gainsay; for every word I speak,
Ye see, I drink the water of mine eyes.
Therefore, no more but this: Henry, your sovereign,
Is prisoner to the foe; his state usurpd,
His realm a slaughter-house, his subjects slain,
His statutes cancelld and his treasure spent;
And yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil.
You fight in justice: then, in Gods name, lords,
Be valiant and give signal to the fight.
Alarum. Retreat. Excursions. Exeunt
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, GLOUCESTER, CLARENCE,  and soldiers; with QUEEN MARGARET, OXFORD, and SOMERSET, prisoners
Now here a period of tumultuous broils.
Away with Oxford to Hames Castle straight:
For Somerset, off with his guilty head.
Go, bear them hence; I will not hear them speak.
For my part, Ill not trouble thee with words.
Nor I, but stoop with patience to my fortune.
Exeunt Oxford and Somerset, guarded
So part we sadly in this troublous world,
To meet with joy in sweet Jerusalem.
Is proclamation made, that who finds Edward
Shall have a high reward, and he his life?
It is: and lo, where youthful Edward comes!
Enter soldiers, with PRINCE EDWARD
Bring forth the gallant, let us hear him speak.
What! can so young a thorn begin to prick?
Edward, what satisfaction canst thou make
For bearing arms, for stirring up my subjects,
And all the trouble thou hast turnd me to?
Speak like a subject, proud ambitious York!
Suppose that I am now my fathers mouth;
Resign thy chair, and where I stand kneel thou,
Whilst I propose the selfsame words to thee,
Which traitor, thou wouldst have me answer to.
Ah, that thy father had been so resolved!
That you might still have worn the petticoat,
And neer have stoln the breech from Lancaster.
Let AEsop fable in a winters night;
His currish riddles sort not with this place.
By heaven, brat, Ill plague ye for that word.
Ay, thou wast born to be a plague to men.
For Gods sake, take away this captive scold.
Nay, take away this scolding crookback rather.
Peace, wilful boy, or I will charm your tongue.
Untutord lad, thou art too malapert.
I know my duty; you are all undutiful:
Lascivious Edward, and thou perjured George,
And thou mis-shapen Dick, I tell ye all
I am your better, traitors as ye are:
And thou usurpst my fathers right and mine.
Take that, thou likeness of this railer here.
Stabs him
Sprawlst thou? take that, to end thy agony.
Stabs him
And theres for twitting me with perjury.
Stabs him
O, kill me too!
Marry, and shall.
Offers to kill her
Hold, Richard, hold; for we have done too much.
Why should she live, to fill the world with words?
What, doth she swoon? use means for her recovery.
Clarence, excuse me to the king my brother;
Ill hence to London on a serious matter:
Ere ye come there, be sure to hear some news.
What? what?
The Tower, the Tower.
Exit
O Ned, sweet Ned! speak to thy mother, boy!
Canst thou not speak? O traitors! murderers!
They that stabbd Caesar shed no blood at all,
Did not offend, nor were not worthy blame,
If this foul deed were by to equal it:
He was a man; this, in respect, a child:
And men neer spend their fury on a child.
Whats worse than murderer, that I may name it?
No, no, my heart will burst, and if I speak:
And I will speak, that so my heart may burst.
Butchers and villains! bloody cannibals!
How sweet a plant have you untimely croppd!
You have no children, butchers! if you had,
The thought of them would have stirrd up remorse:
But if you ever chance to have a child,
Look in his youth to have him so cut off
As, deathmen, you have rid this sweet young prince!
Away with her; go, bear her hence perforce.
Nay, never bear me hence, dispatch me here,
Here sheathe thy sword, Ill pardon thee my death:
What, wilt thou not? then, Clarence, do it thou.
By heaven, I will not do thee so much ease.
Good Clarence, do; sweet Clarence, do thou do it.
Didst thou not hear me swear I would not do it?
Ay, but thou usest to forswear thyself:
Twas sin before, but now tis charity.
What, wilt thou not? Where is that devils butcher,
Hard-favourd Richard? Richard, where art thou?
Thou art not here: murder is thy alms-deed;
Petitioners for blood thou neer putst back.
Away, I say; I charge ye, bear her hence.
So come to you and yours, as to this Prince!
Exit, led out forcibly
Wheres Richard gone?
To London, all in post; and, as I guess,
To make a bloody supper in the Tower.
Hes sudden, if a thing comes in his head.
Now march we hence: discharge the common sort
With pay and thanks, and lets away to London
And see our gentle queen how well she fares:
By this, I hope, she hath a son for me.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. London. The Tower.
Enter KING HENRY VI and GLOUCESTER, with the Lieutenant, on the walls
Good day, my lord. What, at your book so hard?
Ay, my good lord:--my lord, I should say rather;
Tis sin to flatter; good was little better:
Good Gloucester and good devil were alike,
And both preposterous; therefore, not good lord.
Sirrah, leave us to ourselves: we must confer.
Exit Lieutenant
So flies the reckless shepherd from the wolf;
So first the harmless sheep doth yield his fleece
And next his throat unto the butchers knife.
What scene of death hath Roscius now to act?
Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind;
The thief doth fear each bush an officer.
The bird that hath been limed in a bush,
With trembling wings misdoubteth every bush;
And I, the hapless male to one sweet bird,
Have now the fatal object in my eye
Where my poor young was limed, was caught and killd.
Why, what a peevish fool was that of Crete,
That taught his son the office of a fowl!
An yet, for all his wings, the fool was drownd.
I, Daedalus; my poor boy, Icarus;
Thy father, Minos, that denied our course;
The sun that seard the wings of my sweet boy
Thy brother Edward, and thyself the sea
Whose envious gulf did swallow up his life.
Ah, kill me with thy weapon, not with words!
My breast can better brook thy daggers point
Than can my ears that tragic history.
But wherefore dost thou come? ist for my life?
Thinkst thou I am an executioner?
A persecutor, I am sure, thou art:
If murdering innocents be executing,
Why, then thou art an executioner.
Thy son I killd for his presumption.
Hadst thou been killd when first thou didst presume,
Thou hadst not lived to kill a son of mine.
And thus I prophesy, that many a thousand,
Which now mistrust no parcel of my fear,
And many an old mans sigh and many a widows,
And many an orphans water-standing eye--
Men for their sons, wives for their husbands,
And orphans for their parents timeless death--
Shall rue the hour that ever thou wast born.
The owl shriekd at thy birth,--an evil sign;
The night-crow cried, aboding luckless time;
Dogs howld, and hideous tempest shook down trees;
The raven rookd her on the chimneys top,
And chattering pies in dismal discords sung.
Thy mother felt more than a mothers pain,
And, yet brought forth less than a mothers hope,
To wit, an indigested and deformed lump,
Not like the fruit of such a goodly tree.
Teeth hadst thou in thy head when thou wast born,
To signify thou camest to bite the world:
And, if the rest be true which I have heard,
Thou camest--
Ill hear no more: die, prophet in thy speech:
Stabs him
For this amongst the rest, was I ordaind.
Ay, and for much more slaughter after this.
God forgive my sins, and pardon thee!
Dies
What, will the aspiring blood of Lancaster
Sink in the ground? I thought it would have mounted.
See how my sword weeps for the poor kings death!
O, may such purple tears be alway shed
From those that wish the downfall of our house!
If any spark of life be yet remaining,
Down, down to hell; and say I sent thee thither:
Stabs him again
I, that have neither pity, love, nor fear.
Indeed, tis true that Henry told me of;
For I have often heard my mother say
I came into the world with my legs forward:
Had I not reason, think ye, to make haste,
And seek their ruin that usurpd our right?
The midwife wonderd and the women cried
O, Jesus bless us, he is born with teeth!
And so I was; which plainly signified
That I should snarl and bite and play the dog.
Then, since the heavens have shaped my body so,
Let hell make crookd my mind to answer it.
I have no brother, I am like no brother;
And this word love, which graybeards call divine,
Be resident in men like one another
And not in me: I am myself alone.
Clarence, beware; thou keepst me from the light:
But I will sort a pitchy day for thee;
For I will buz abroad such prophecies
That Edward shall be fearful of his life,
And then, to purge his fear, Ill be thy death.
King Henry and the prince his son are gone:
Clarence, thy turn is next, and then the rest,
Counting myself but bad till I be best.
Ill throw thy body in another room
And triumph, Henry, in thy day of doom.
Exit, with the body
SCENE VII. London. The palace.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV, QUEEN ELIZABETH,  CLARENCE, GLOUCESTER, HASTINGS, a Nurse with the young Prince, and Attendants
Once more we sit in Englands royal throne,
Re-purchased with the blood of enemies.
What valiant foemen, like to autumns corn,
Have we mowd down, in tops of all their pride!
Three Dukes of Somerset, threefold renownd
For hardy and undoubted champions;
Two Cliffords, as the father and the son,
And two Northumberlands; two braver men
Neer spurrd their coursers at the trumpets sound;
With them, the two brave bears, Warwick and Montague,
That in their chains fetterd the kingly lion
And made the forest tremble when they roard.
Thus have we swept suspicion from our seat
And made our footstool of security.
Come hither, Bess, and let me kiss my boy.
Young Ned, for thee, thine uncles and myself
Have in our armours watchd the winters night,
Went all afoot in summers scalding heat,
That thou mightst repossess the crown in peace;
And of our labours thou shalt reap the gain.
[Aside]  Ill blast his harvest, if your head were laid;
For yet I am not lookd on in the world.
This shoulder was ordaind so thick to heave;
And heave it shall some weight, or break my back:
Work thou the way,--and thou shalt execute.
Clarence and Gloucester, love my lovely queen;
And kiss your princely nephew, brothers both.
The duty that I owe unto your majesty
I seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.
Thanks, noble Clarence; worthy brother, thanks.
And, that I love the tree from whence thou sprangst,
Witness the loving kiss I give the fruit.
Aside
And cried all hail! when as he meant all harm.
Now am I seated as my soul delights,
Having my countrys peace and brothers loves.
What will your grace have done with Margaret?
Reignier, her father, to the king of France
Hath pawnd the Sicils and Jerusalem,
And hither have they sent it for her ransom.
Away with her, and waft her hence to France.
And now what rests but that we spend the time
With stately triumphs, mirthful comic shows,
Such as befits the pleasure of the court?
Sound drums and trumpets! farewell sour annoy!
For here, I hope, begins our lasting joy.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Rousillon. The COUNTs palace.
Enter BERTRAM, the COUNTESS of Rousillon, HELENA, and LAFEU, all in black
In delivering my son from me, I bury a second husband.
And I in going, madam, weep oer my fathers death
anew: but I must attend his majestys command, to
whom I am now in ward, evermore in subjection.
You shall find of the king a husband, madam; you,
sir, a father: he that so generally is at all times
good must of necessity hold his virtue to you; whose
worthiness would stir it up where it wanted rather
than lack it where there is such abundance.
What hope is there of his majestys amendment?
He hath abandoned his physicians, madam; under whose
practises he hath persecuted time with hope, and
finds no other advantage in the process but only the
losing of hope by time.
This young gentlewoman had a father,--O, that
had! how sad a passage tis!--whose skill was
almost as great as his honesty; had it stretched so
far, would have made nature immortal, and death
should have play for lack of work. Would, for the
kings sake, he were living! I think it would be
the death of the kings disease.
How called you the man you speak of, madam?
He was famous, sir, in his profession, and it was
his great right to be so: Gerard de Narbon.
He was excellent indeed, madam: the king very
lately spoke of him admiringly and mourningly: he
was skilful enough to have lived still, if knowledge
could be set up against mortality.
What is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?
A fistula, my lord.
I heard not of it before.
I would it were not notorious. Was this gentlewoman
the daughter of Gerard de Narbon?
His sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my
overlooking. I have those hopes of her good that
her education promises; her dispositions she
inherits, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where
an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there
commendations go with pity; they are virtues and
traitors too; in her they are the better for their
simpleness; she derives her honesty and achieves her goodness.
Your commendations, madam, get from her tears.
Tis the best brine a maiden can season her praise
in. The remembrance of her father never approaches
her heart but the tyranny of her sorrows takes all
livelihood from her cheek. No more of this, Helena;
go to, no more; lest it be rather thought you affect
a sorrow than have it.
I do affect a sorrow indeed, but I have it too.
Moderate lamentation is the right of the dead,
excessive grief the enemy to the living.
If the living be enemy to the grief, the excess
makes it soon mortal.
Madam, I desire your holy wishes.
How understand we that?
Be thou blest, Bertram, and succeed thy father
In manners, as in shape! thy blood and virtue
Contend for empire in thee, and thy goodness
Share with thy birthright! Love all, trust a few,
Do wrong to none: be able for thine enemy
Rather in power than use, and keep thy friend
Under thy own lifes key: be chequed for silence,
But never taxd for speech. What heaven more will,
That thee may furnish and my prayers pluck down,
Fall on thy head! Farewell, my lord;
Tis an unseasond courtier; good my lord,
Advise him.
He cannot want the best
That shall attend his love.
Heaven bless him! Farewell, Bertram.
Exit
[To HELENA]  The best wishes that can be forged in
your thoughts be servants to you! Be comfortable
to my mother, your mistress, and make much of her.
Farewell, pretty lady: you must hold the credit of
your father.
Exeunt BERTRAM and LAFEU
O, were that all! I think not on my father;
And these great tears grace his remembrance more
Than those I shed for him. What was he like?
I have forgot him: my imagination
Carries no favour int but Bertrams.
I am undone: there is no living, none,
If Bertram be away. Twere all one
That I should love a bright particular star
And think to wed it, he is so above me:
In his bright radiance and collateral light
Must I be comforted, not in his sphere.
The ambition in my love thus plagues itself:
The hind that would be mated by the lion
Must die for love. Twas pretty, though plague,
To see him every hour; to sit and draw
His arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls,
In our hearts table; heart too capable
Of every line and trick of his sweet favour:
But now hes gone, and my idolatrous fancy
Must sanctify his reliques. Who comes here?
Enter PAROLLES
Aside
One that goes with him: I love him for his sake;
And yet I know him a notorious liar,
Think him a great way fool, solely a coward;
Yet these fixed evils sit so fit in him,
That they take place, when virtues steely bones
Look bleak i the cold wind: withal, full oft we see
Cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
Save you, fair queen!
And you, monarch!
No.
And no.
Are you meditating on virginity?
Ay. You have some stain of soldier in you: let me
ask you a question. Man is enemy to virginity; how
may we barricado it against him?
Keep him out.
But he assails; and our virginity, though valiant,
in the defence yet is weak: unfold to us some
warlike resistance.
There is none: man, sitting down before you, will
undermine you and blow you up.
Bless our poor virginity from underminers and
blowers up! Is there no military policy, how
virgins might blow up men?
Virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be
blown up: marry, in blowing him down again, with
the breach yourselves made, you lose your city. It
is not politic in the commonwealth of nature to
preserve virginity. Loss of virginity is rational
increase and there was never virgin got till
virginity was first lost. That you were made of is
metal to make virgins. Virginity by being once lost
may be ten times found; by being ever kept, it is
ever lost: tis too cold a companion; away with t!
I will stand for t a little, though therefore I die a virgin.
Theres little can be said in t; tis against the
rule of nature. To speak on the part of virginity,
is to accuse your mothers; which is most infallible
disobedience. He that hangs himself is a virgin:
virginity murders itself and should be buried in
highways out of all sanctified limit, as a desperate
offendress against nature. Virginity breeds mites,
much like a cheese; consumes itself to the very
paring, and so dies with feeding his own stomach.
Besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, made of
self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the
canon. Keep it not; you cannot choose but loose
byt: out with t! within ten year it will make
itself ten, which is a goodly increase; and the
principal itself not much the worse: away with t!
How might one do, sir, to lose it to her own liking?
Let me see: marry, ill, to like him that neer it
likes. Tis a commodity will lose the gloss with
lying; the longer kept, the less worth: off with t
while tis vendible; answer the time of request.
Virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap out
of fashion: richly suited, but unsuitable: just
like the brooch and the tooth-pick, which wear not
now. Your date is better in your pie and your
porridge than in your cheek; and your virginity,
your old virginity, is like one of our French
withered pears, it looks ill, it eats drily; marry,
tis a withered pear; it was formerly better;
marry, yet tis a withered pear: will you anything with it?
Not my virginity yet [         ]
There shall your master have a thousand loves,
A mother and a mistress and a friend,
A phoenix, captain and an enemy,
A guide, a goddess, and a sovereign,
A counsellor, a traitress, and a dear;
His humble ambition, proud humility,
His jarring concord, and his discord dulcet,
His faith, his sweet disaster; with a world
Of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms,
That blinking Cupid gossips. Now shall he--
I know not what he shall. God send him well!
The courts a learning place, and he is one--
What one, i faith?
That I wish well. Tis pity--
Whats pity?
That wishing well had not a body int,
Which might be felt; that we, the poorer born,
Whose baser stars do shut us up in wishes,
Might with effects of them follow our friends,
And show what we alone must think, which never
Return us thanks.
Enter Page
Monsieur Parolles, my lord calls for you.
Exit
Little Helen, farewell; if I can remember thee, I
will think of thee at court.
Monsieur Parolles, you were born under a charitable star.
Under Mars, I.
I especially think, under Mars.
Why under Mars?
The wars have so kept you under that you must needs
be born under Mars.
When he was predominant.
When he was retrograde, I think, rather.
Why think you so?
You go so much backward when you fight.
Thats for advantage.
So is running away, when fear proposes the safety;
but the composition that your valour and fear makes
in you is a virtue of a good wing, and I like the wear well.
I am so full of businesses, I cannot answer thee
acutely. I will return perfect courtier; in the
which, my instruction shall serve to naturalize
thee, so thou wilt be capable of a courtiers
counsel and understand what advice shall thrust upon
thee; else thou diest in thine unthankfulness, and
thine ignorance makes thee away: farewell. When
thou hast leisure, say thy prayers; when thou hast
none, remember thy friends; get thee a good husband,
and use him as he uses thee; so, farewell.
Exit
Our remedies oft in ourselves do lie,
Which we ascribe to heaven: the fated sky
Gives us free scope, only doth backward pull
Our slow designs when we ourselves are dull.
What power is it which mounts my love so high,
That makes me see, and cannot feed mine eye?
The mightiest space in fortune nature brings
To join like likes and kiss like native things.
Impossible be strange attempts to those
That weigh their pains in sense and do suppose
What hath been cannot be: who ever strove
So show her merit, that did miss her love?
The kings disease--my project may deceive me,
But my intents are fixd and will not leave me.
Exit
SCENE II. Paris. The KINGs palace.
Flourish of cornets. Enter the KING of France, with letters, and divers Attendants
The Florentines and Senoys are by the ears;
Have fought with equal fortune and continue
A braving war.
So tis reported, sir.
Nay, tis most credible; we here received it
A certainty, vouchd from our cousin Austria,
With caution that the Florentine will move us
For speedy aid; wherein our dearest friend
Prejudicates the business and would seem
To have us make denial.
His love and wisdom,
Approved so to your majesty, may plead
For amplest credence.
He hath armd our answer,
And Florence is denied before he comes:
Yet, for our gentlemen that mean to see
The Tuscan service, freely have they leave
To stand on either part.
It well may serve
A nursery to our gentry, who are sick
For breathing and exploit.
Whats he comes here?
Enter BERTRAM, LAFEU, and PAROLLES
It is the Count Rousillon, my good lord,
Young Bertram.
Youth, thou bearst thy fathers face;
Frank nature, rather curious than in haste,
Hath well composed thee. Thy fathers moral parts
Mayst thou inherit too! Welcome to Paris.
My thanks and duty are your majestys.
I would I had that corporal soundness now,
As when thy father and myself in friendship
First tried our soldiership! He did look far
Into the service of the time and was
Discipled of the bravest: he lasted long;
But on us both did haggish age steal on
And wore us out of act. It much repairs me
To talk of your good father. In his youth
He had the wit which I can well observe
To-day in our young lords; but they may jest
Till their own scorn return to them unnoted
Ere they can hide their levity in honour;
So like a courtier, contempt nor bitterness
Were in his pride or sharpness; if they were,
His equal had awaked them, and his honour,
Clock to itself, knew the true minute when
Exception bid him speak, and at this time
His tongue obeyd his hand: who were below him
He used as creatures of another place
And bowd his eminent top to their low ranks,
Making them proud of his humility,
In their poor praise he humbled. Such a man
Might be a copy to these younger times;
Which, followd well, would demonstrate them now
But goers backward.
His good remembrance, sir,
Lies richer in your thoughts than on his tomb;
So in approof lives not his epitaph
As in your royal speech.
Would I were with him! He would always say--
Methinks I hear him now; his plausive words
He scatterd not in ears, but grafted them,
To grow there and to bear,--Let me not live,--
This his good melancholy oft began,
On the catastrophe and heel of pastime,
When it was out,--Let me not live, quoth he,
After my flame lacks oil, to be the snuff
Of younger spirits, whose apprehensive senses
All but new things disdain; whose judgments are
Mere fathers of their garments; whose constancies
Expire before their fashions. This he wishd;
I after him do after him wish too,
Since I nor wax nor honey can bring home,
I quickly were dissolved from my hive,
To give some labourers room.
You are loved, sir:
They that least lend it you shall lack you first.
I fill a place, I knowt. How long ist, count,
Since the physician at your fathers died?
He was much famed.
Some six months since, my lord.
If he were living, I would try him yet.
Lend me an arm; the rest have worn me out
With several applications; nature and sickness
Debate it at their leisure. Welcome, count;
My sons no dearer.
Thank your majesty.
Exeunt. Flourish
SCENE III. Rousillon. The COUNTs palace.
Enter COUNTESS, Steward, and Clown
I will now hear; what say you of this gentlewoman?
Madam, the care I have had to even your content, I
wish might be found in the calendar of my past
endeavours; for then we wound our modesty and make
foul the clearness of our deservings, when of
ourselves we publish them.
What does this knave here? Get you gone, sirrah:
the complaints I have heard of you I do not all
believe: tis my slowness that I do not; for I know
you lack not folly to commit them, and have ability
enough to make such knaveries yours.
Tis not unknown to you, madam, I am a poor fellow.
Well, sir.
No, madam, tis not so well that I am poor, though
many of the rich are damned: but, if I may have
