your ladyships good will to go to the world, Isbel
the woman and I will do as we may.
Wilt thou needs be a beggar?
I do beg your good will in this case.
In what case?
In Isbels case and mine own. Service is no
heritage: and I think I shall never have the
blessing of God till I have issue o my body; for
they say barnes are blessings.
Tell me thy reason why thou wilt marry.
My poor body, madam, requires it: I am driven on
by the flesh; and he must needs go that the devil drives.
Is this all your worships reason?
Faith, madam, I have other holy reasons such as they
are.
May the world know them?
I have been, madam, a wicked creature, as you and
all flesh and blood are; and, indeed, I do marry
that I may repent.
Thy marriage, sooner than thy wickedness.
I am out o friends, madam; and I hope to have
friends for my wifes sake.
Such friends are thine enemies, knave.
Youre shallow, madam, in great friends; for the
knaves come to do that for me which I am aweary of.
He that ears my land spares my team and gives me
leave to in the crop; if I be his cuckold, hes my
drudge: he that comforts my wife is the cherisher
of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh
and blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my
flesh and blood is my friend: ergo, he that kisses
my wife is my friend. If men could be contented to
be what they are, there were no fear in marriage;
for young Charbon the Puritan and old Poysam the
Papist, howsomeer their hearts are severed in
religion, their heads are both one; they may jowl
horns together, like any deer i the herd.
Wilt thou ever be a foul-mouthed and calumnious knave?
A prophet I, madam; and I speak the truth the next
way:
For I the ballad will repeat,
Which men full true shall find;
Your marriage comes by destiny,
Your cuckoo sings by kind.
Get you gone, sir; Ill talk with you more anon.
May it please you, madam, that he bid Helen come to
you: of her I am to speak.
Sirrah, tell my gentlewoman I would speak with her;
Helen, I mean.
Was this fair face the cause, quoth she,
Why the Grecians sacked Troy?
Fond done, done fond,
Was this King Priams joy?
With that she sighed as she stood,
With that she sighed as she stood,
And gave this sentence then;
Among nine bad if one be good,
Among nine bad if one be good,
Theres yet one good in ten.
What, one good in ten? you corrupt the song, sirrah.
One good woman in ten, madam; which is a purifying
o the song: would God would serve the world so all
the year! weld find no fault with the tithe-woman,
if I were the parson. One in ten, quoth a! An we
might have a good woman born but one every blazing
star, or at an earthquake, twould mend the lottery
well: a man may draw his heart out, ere a pluck
one.
Youll be gone, sir knave, and do as I command you.
That man should be at womans command, and yet no
hurt done! Though honesty be no puritan, yet it
will do no hurt; it will wear the surplice of
humility over the black gown of a big heart. I am
going, forsooth: the business is for Helen to come hither.
Exit
Well, now.
I know, madam, you love your gentlewoman entirely.
Faith, I do: her father bequeathed her to me; and
she herself, without other advantage, may lawfully
make title to as much love as she finds: there is
more owing her than is paid; and more shall be paid
her than shell demand.
Madam, I was very late more near her than I think
she wished me: alone she was, and did communicate
to herself her own words to her own ears; she
thought, I dare vow for her, they touched not any
stranger sense. Her matter was, she loved your son:
Fortune, she said, was no goddess, that had put
such difference betwixt their two estates; Love no
god, that would not extend his might, only where
qualities were level; Dian no queen of virgins, that
would suffer her poor knight surprised, without
rescue in the first assault or ransom afterward.
This she delivered in the most bitter touch of
sorrow that eer I heard virgin exclaim in: which I
held my duty speedily to acquaint you withal;
sithence, in the loss that may happen, it concerns
you something to know it.
You have discharged this honestly; keep it to
yourself: many likelihoods informed me of this
before, which hung so tottering in the balance that
I could neither believe nor misdoubt. Pray you,
leave me: stall this in your bosom; and I thank you
for your honest care: I will speak with you further anon.
Exit Steward
Enter HELENA
Even so it was with me when I was young:
If ever we are natures, these are ours; this thorn
Doth to our rose of youth rightly belong;
Our blood to us, this to our blood is born;
It is the show and seal of natures truth,
Where loves strong passion is impressd in youth:
By our remembrances of days foregone,
Such were our faults, or then we thought them none.
Her eye is sick ont: I observe her now.
What is your pleasure, madam?
You know, Helen,
I am a mother to you.
Mine honourable mistress.
Nay, a mother:
Why not a mother? When I said a mother,
Methought you saw a serpent: whats in mother,
That you start at it? I say, I am your mother;
And put you in the catalogue of those
That were enwombed mine: tis often seen
Adoption strives with nature and choice breeds
A native slip to us from foreign seeds:
You neer oppressd me with a mothers groan,
Yet I express to you a mothers care:
Gods mercy, maiden! does it curd thy blood
To say I am thy mother? Whats the matter,
That this distemperd messenger of wet,
The many-colourd Iris, rounds thine eye?
Why? that you are my daughter?
That I am not.
I say, I am your mother.
Pardon, madam;
The Count Rousillon cannot be my brother:
I am from humble, he from honourd name;
No note upon my parents, his all noble:
My master, my dear lord he is; and I
His servant live, and will his vassal die:
He must not be my brother.
Nor I your mother?
You are my mother, madam; would you were,--
So that my lord your son were not my brother,--
Indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers,
I care no more for than I do for heaven,
So I were not his sister. Cant no other,
But, I your daughter, he must be my brother?
Yes, Helen, you might be my daughter-in-law:
God shield you mean it not! daughter and mother
So strive upon your pulse. What, pale again?
My fear hath catchd your fondness: now I see
The mystery of your loneliness, and find
Your salt tears head: now to all sense tis gross
You love my son; invention is ashamed,
Against the proclamation of thy passion,
To say thou dost not: therefore tell me true;
But tell me then, tis so; for, look thy cheeks
Confess it, th one to th other; and thine eyes
See it so grossly shown in thy behaviors
That in their kind they speak it: only sin
And hellish obstinacy tie thy tongue,
That truth should be suspected. Speak, ist so?
If it be so, you have wound a goodly clew;
If it be not, forsweart: howeer, I charge thee,
As heaven shall work in me for thine avail,
Tell me truly.
Good madam, pardon me!
Do you love my son?
Your pardon, noble mistress!
Love you my son?
Do not you love him, madam?
Go not about; my love hath int a bond,
Whereof the world takes note: come, come, disclose
The state of your affection; for your passions
Have to the full appeachd.
Then, I confess,
Here on my knee, before high heaven and you,
That before you, and next unto high heaven,
I love your son.
My friends were poor, but honest; sos my love:
Be not offended; for it hurts not him
That he is loved of me: I follow him not
By any token of presumptuous suit;
Nor would I have him till I do deserve him;
Yet never know how that desert should be.
I know I love in vain, strive against hope;
Yet in this captious and intenible sieve
I still pour in the waters of my love
And lack not to lose still: thus, Indian-like,
Religious in mine error, I adore
The sun, that looks upon his worshipper,
But knows of him no more. My dearest madam,
Let not your hate encounter with my love
For loving where you do: but if yourself,
Whose aged honour cites a virtuous youth,
Did ever in so true a flame of liking
Wish chastely and love dearly, that your Dian
Was both herself and love: O, then, give pity
To her, whose state is such that cannot choose
But lend and give where she is sure to lose;
That seeks not to find that her search implies,
But riddle-like lives sweetly where she dies!
Had you not lately an intent,--speak truly,--
To go to Paris?
Madam, I had.
Wherefore? tell true.
I will tell truth; by grace itself I swear.
You know my father left me some prescriptions
Of rare and proved effects, such as his reading
And manifest experience had collected
For general sovereignty; and that he willd me
In heedfullst reservation to bestow them,
As notes whose faculties inclusive were
More than they were in note: amongst the rest,
There is a remedy, approved, set down,
To cure the desperate languishings whereof
The king is renderd lost.
This was your motive
For Paris, was it? speak.
My lord your son made me to think of this;
Else Paris and the medicine and the king
Had from the conversation of my thoughts
Haply been absent then.
But think you, Helen,
If you should tender your supposed aid,
He would receive it? he and his physicians
Are of a mind; he, that they cannot help him,
They, that they cannot help: how shall they credit
A poor unlearned virgin, when the schools,
Embowelld of their doctrine, have left off
The danger to itself?
Theres something int,
More than my fathers skill, which was the greatest
Of his profession, that his good receipt
Shall for my legacy be sanctified
By the luckiest stars in heaven: and, would your honour
But give me leave to try success, Ild venture
The well-lost life of mine on his graces cure
By such a day and hour.
Dost thou believet?
Ay, madam, knowingly.
Why, Helen, thou shalt have my leave and love,
Means and attendants and my loving greetings
To those of mine in court: Ill stay at home
And pray Gods blessing into thy attempt:
Be gone to-morrow; and be sure of this,
What I can help thee to thou shalt not miss.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Paris. The KINGs palace.
Flourish of cornets. Enter the KING, attended  with divers young Lords taking leave for the Florentine war; BERTRAM, and PAROLLES
Farewell, young lords; these warlike principles
Do not throw from you: and you, my lords, farewell:
Share the advice betwixt you; if both gain, all
The gift doth stretch itself as tis received,
And is enough for both.
Tis our hope, sir,
After well enterd soldiers, to return
And find your grace in health.
No, no, it cannot be; and yet my heart
Will not confess he owes the malady
That doth my life besiege. Farewell, young lords;
Whether I live or die, be you the sons
Of worthy Frenchmen: let higher Italy,--
Those bated that inherit but the fall
Of the last monarchy,--see that you come
Not to woo honour, but to wed it; when
The bravest questant shrinks, find what you seek,
That fame may cry you loud: I say, farewell.
Health, at your bidding, serve your majesty!
Those girls of Italy, take heed of them:
They say, our French lack language to deny,
If they demand: beware of being captives,
Before you serve.
Our hearts receive your warnings.
Farewell. Come hither to me.
Exit, attended
O, my sweet lord, that you will stay behind us!
Tis not his fault, the spark.
O, tis brave wars!
Most admirable: I have seen those wars.
I am commanded here, and kept a coil with
Too young and the next year and tis too early.
An thy mind stand tot, boy, steal away bravely.
I shall stay here the forehorse to a smock,
Creaking my shoes on the plain masonry,
Till honour be bought up and no sword worn
But one to dance with! By heaven, Ill steal away.
Theres honour in the theft.
Commit it, count.
I am your accessary; and so, farewell.
I grow to you, and our parting is a tortured body.
Farewell, captain.
Sweet Monsieur Parolles!
Noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. Good
sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall
find in the regiment of the Spinii one Captain
Spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war, here
on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword
entrenched it: say to him, I live; and observe his
reports for me.
We shall, noble captain.
Exeunt Lords
Mars dote on you for his novices! what will ye do?
Stay: the king.
Re-enter KING. BERTRAM and PAROLLES retire
[To BERTRAM]  Use a more spacious ceremony to the
noble lords; you have restrained yourself within the
list of too cold an adieu: be more expressive to
them: for they wear themselves in the cap of the
time, there do muster true gait, eat, speak, and
move under the influence of the most received star;
and though the devil lead the measure, such are to
be followed: after them, and take a more dilated farewell.
And I will do so.
Worthy fellows; and like to prove most sinewy sword-men.
Exeunt BERTRAM and PAROLLES
Enter LAFEU
[Kneeling]  Pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.
Ill fee thee to stand up.
Then heres a man stands, that has brought his pardon.
I would you had kneeld, my lord, to ask me mercy,
And that at my bidding you could so stand up.
I would I had; so I had broke thy pate,
And askd thee mercy fort.
Good faith, across: but, my good lord tis thus;
Will you be cured of your infirmity?
No.
O, will you eat no grapes, my royal fox?
Yes, but you will my noble grapes, an if
My royal fox could reach them: I have seen a medicine
Thats able to breathe life into a stone,
Quicken a rock, and make you dance canary
With spritely fire and motion; whose simple touch,
Is powerful to araise King Pepin, nay,
To give great Charlemain a pen ins hand,
And write to her a love-line.
What her is this?
Why, Doctor She: my lord, theres one arrived,
If you will see her: now, by my faith and honour,
If seriously I may convey my thoughts
In this my light deliverance, I have spoke
With one that, in her sex, her years, profession,
Wisdom and constancy, hath amazed me more
Than I dare blame my weakness: will you see her
For that is her demand, and know her business?
That done, laugh well at me.
Now, good Lafeu,
Bring in the admiration; that we with thee
May spend our wonder too, or take off thine
By wondering how thou tookst it.
Nay, Ill fit you,
And not be all day neither.
Exit
Thus he his special nothing ever prologues.
Re-enter LAFEU, with HELENA
Nay, come your ways.
This haste hath wings indeed.
Nay, come your ways:
This is his majesty; say your mind to him:
A traitor you do look like; but such traitors
His majesty seldom fears: I am Cressids uncle,
That dare leave two together; fare you well.
Exit
Now, fair one, does your business follow us?
Ay, my good lord.
Gerard de Narbon was my father;
In what he did profess, well found.
I knew him.
The rather will I spare my praises towards him:
Knowing him is enough. Ons bed of death
Many receipts he gave me: chiefly one.
Which, as the dearest issue of his practise,
And of his old experience the oily darling,
He bade me store up, as a triple eye,
Safer than mine own two, more dear; I have so;
And hearing your high majesty is touchd
With that malignant cause wherein the honour
Of my dear fathers gift stands chief in power,
I come to tender it and my appliance
With all bound humbleness.
We thank you, maiden;
But may not be so credulous of cure,
When our most learned doctors leave us and
The congregated college have concluded
That labouring art can never ransom nature
From her inaidible estate; I say we must not
So stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope,
To prostitute our past-cure malady
To empirics, or to dissever so
Our great self and our credit, to esteem
A senseless help when help past sense we deem.
My duty then shall pay me for my pains:
I will no more enforce mine office on you.
Humbly entreating from your royal thoughts
A modest one, to bear me back again.
I cannot give thee less, to be calld grateful:
Thou thoughtst to help me; and such thanks I give
As one near death to those that wish him live:
But what at full I know, thou knowst no part,
I knowing all my peril, thou no art.
What I can do can do no hurt to try,
Since you set up your rest gainst remedy.
He that of greatest works is finisher
Oft does them by the weakest minister:
So holy writ in babes hath judgment shown,
When judges have been babes; great floods have flown
From simple sources, and great seas have dried
When miracles have by the greatest been denied.
Oft expectation fails and most oft there
Where most it promises, and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest and despair most fits.
I must not hear thee; fare thee well, kind maid;
Thy pains not used must by thyself be paid:
Proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
Inspired merit so by breath is barrd:
It is not so with Him that all things knows
As tis with us that square our guess by shows;
But most it is presumption in us when
The help of heaven we count the act of men.
Dear sir, to my endeavours give consent;
Of heaven, not me, make an experiment.
I am not an impostor that proclaim
Myself against the level of mine aim;
But know I think and think I know most sure
My art is not past power nor you past cure.
Are thou so confident? within what space
Hopest thou my cure?
The greatst grace lending grace
Ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring
Their fiery torcher his diurnal ring,
Ere twice in murk and occidental damp
Moist Hesperus hath quenchd his sleepy lamp,
Or four and twenty times the pilots glass
Hath told the thievish minutes how they pass,
What is infirm from your sound parts shall fly,
Health shall live free and sickness freely die.
Upon thy certainty and confidence
What darest thou venture?
Tax of impudence,
A strumpets boldness, a divulged shame
Traduced by odious ballads: my maidens name
Seard otherwise; nay, worse--if worse--extended
With vilest torture let my life be ended.
Methinks in thee some blessed spirit doth speak
His powerful sound within an organ weak:
And what impossibility would slay
In common sense, sense saves another way.
Thy life is dear; for all that life can rate
Worth name of life in thee hath estimate,
Youth, beauty, wisdom, courage, all
That happiness and prime can happy call:
Thou this to hazard needs must intimate
Skill infinite or monstrous desperate.
Sweet practiser, thy physic I will try,
That ministers thine own death if I die.
If I break time, or flinch in property
Of what I spoke, unpitied let me die,
And well deserved: not helping, deaths my fee;
But, if I help, what do you promise me?
Make thy demand.
But will you make it even?
Ay, by my sceptre and my hopes of heaven.
Then shalt thou give me with thy kingly hand
What husband in thy power I will command:
Exempted be from me the arrogance
To choose from forth the royal blood of France,
My low and humble name to propagate
With any branch or image of thy state;
But such a one, thy vassal, whom I know
Is free for me to ask, thee to bestow.
Here is my hand; the premises observed,
Thy will by my performance shall be served:
So make the choice of thy own time, for I,
Thy resolved patient, on thee still rely.
More should I question thee, and more I must,
Though more to know could not be more to trust,
From whence thou camest, how tended on: but rest
Unquestiond welcome and undoubted blest.
Give me some help here, ho! If thou proceed
As high as word, my deed shall match thy meed.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE II. Rousillon. The COUNTs palace.
Enter COUNTESS and Clown
Come on, sir; I shall now put you to the height of
your breeding.
I will show myself highly fed and lowly taught: I
know my business is but to the court.
To the court! why, what place make you special,
when you put off that with such contempt? But to the court!
Truly, madam, if God have lent a man any manners, he
may easily put it off at court: he that cannot make
a leg, put offs cap, kiss his hand and say nothing,
has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap; and indeed
such a fellow, to say precisely, were not for the
court; but for me, I have an answer will serve all
men.
Marry, thats a bountiful answer that fits all
questions.
It is like a barbers chair that fits all buttocks,
the pin-buttock, the quatch-buttock, the brawn
buttock, or any buttock.
Will your answer serve fit to all questions?
As fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney,
as your French crown for your taffeta punk, as Tibs
rush for Toms forefinger, as a pancake for Shrove
Tuesday, a morris for May-day, as the nail to his
hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding queen
to a wrangling knave, as the nuns lip to the
friars mouth, nay, as the pudding to his skin.
Have you, I say, an answer of such fitness for all
questions?
From below your duke to beneath your constable, it
will fit any question.
It must be an answer of most monstrous size that
must fit all demands.
But a trifle neither, in good faith, if the learned
should speak truth of it: here it is, and all that
belongs tot. Ask me if I am a courtier: it shall
do you no harm to learn.
To be young again, if we could: I will be a fool in
question, hoping to be the wiser by your answer. I
pray you, sir, are you a courtier?
O Lord, sir! Theres a simple putting off. More,
more, a hundred of them.
Sir, I am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.
O Lord, sir! Thick, thick, spare not me.
I think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
O Lord, sir! Nay, put me tot, I warrant you.
You were lately whipped, sir, as I think.
O Lord, sir! spare not me.
Do you cry, O Lord, sir! at your whipping, and
spare not me? Indeed your O Lord, sir! is very
sequent to your whipping: you would answer very well
to a whipping, if you were but bound tot.
I neer had worse luck in my life in my O Lord,
sir! I see things may serve long, but not serve ever.
I play the noble housewife with the time
To entertaint so merrily with a fool.
O Lord, sir! why, theret serves well again.
An end, sir; to your business. Give Helen this,
And urge her to a present answer back:
Commend me to my kinsmen and my son:
This is not much.
Not much commendation to them.
Not much employment for you: you understand me?
Most fruitfully: I am there before my legs.
Haste you again.
Exeunt severally
SCENE III. Paris. The KINGs palace.
Enter BERTRAM, LAFEU, and PAROLLES
They say miracles are past; and we have our
philosophical persons, to make modern and familiar,
things supernatural and causeless. Hence is it that
we make trifles of terrors, ensconcing ourselves
into seeming knowledge, when we should submit
ourselves to an unknown fear.
Why, tis the rarest argument of wonder that hath
shot out in our latter times.
And so tis.
To be relinquishd of the artists,--
So I say.
Both of Galen and Paracelsus.
So I say.
Of all the learned and authentic fellows,--
Right; so I say.
That gave him out incurable,--
Why, there tis; so say I too.
Not to be helped,--
Right; as twere, a man assured of a--
Uncertain life, and sure death.
Just, you say well; so would I have said.
I may truly say, it is a novelty to the world.
It is, indeed: if you will have it in showing, you
shall read it in--what do you call there?
A showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.
Thats it; I would have said the very same.
Why, your dolphin is not lustier: fore me,
I speak in respect--
Nay, tis strange, tis very strange, that is the
brief and the tedious of it; and hes of a most
facinerious spirit that will not acknowledge it to be the--
Very hand of heaven.
Ay, so I say.
In a most weak--
pausing
and debile minister, great power, great
transcendence: which should, indeed, give us a
further use to be made than alone the recovery of
the king, as to be--
pausing
generally thankful.
I would have said it; you say well. Here comes the king.
Enter KING, HELENA, and Attendants. LAFEU and PAROLLES retire
Lustig, as the Dutchman says: Ill like a maid the
better, whilst I have a tooth in my head: why, hes
able to lead her a coranto.
Mort du vinaigre! is not this Helen?
Fore God, I think so.
Go, call before me all the lords in court.
Sit, my preserver, by thy patients side;
And with this healthful hand, whose banishd sense
Thou hast repeald, a second time receive
The confirmation of my promised gift,
Which but attends thy naming.
Enter three or four Lords
Fair maid, send forth thine eye: this youthful parcel
Of noble bachelors stand at my bestowing,
Oer whom both sovereign power and fathers voice
I have to use: thy frank election make;
Thou hast power to choose, and they none to forsake.
To each of you one fair and virtuous mistress
Fall, when Love please! marry, to each, but one!
Ild give bay Curtal and his furniture,
My mouth no more were broken than these boys,
And writ as little beard.
Peruse them well:
Not one of those but had a noble father.
Gentlemen,
Heaven hath through me restored the king to health.
We understand it, and thank heaven for you.
I am a simple maid, and therein wealthiest,
That I protest I simply am a maid.
Please it your majesty, I have done already:
The blushes in my cheeks thus whisper me,
We blush that thou shouldst choose; but, be refused,
Let the white death sit on thy cheek for ever;
Well neer come there again.
Make choice; and, see,
Who shuns thy love shuns all his love in me.
Now, Dian, from thy altar do I fly,
And to imperial Love, that god most high,
Do my sighs stream. Sir, will you hear my suit?
And grant it.
Thanks, sir; all the rest is mute.
I had rather be in this choice than throw ames-ace
for my life.
The honour, sir, that flames in your fair eyes,
Before I speak, too threateningly replies:
Love make your fortunes twenty times above
Her that so wishes and her humble love!
No better, if you please.
My wish receive,
Which great Love grant! and so, I take my leave.
Do all they deny her? An they were sons of mine,
Id have them whipped; or I would send them to the
Turk, to make eunuchs of.
Be not afraid that I your hand should take;
Ill never do you wrong for your own sake:
Blessing upon your vows! and in your bed
Find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
These boys are boys of ice, theyll none have her:
sure, they are bastards to the English; the French
neer got em.
You are too young, too happy, and too good,
To make yourself a son out of my blood.
Fair one, I think not so.
Theres one grape yet; I am sure thy father drunk
wine: but if thou best not an ass, I am a youth
of fourteen; I have known thee already.
[To BERTRAM]  I dare not say I take you; but I give
Me and my service, ever whilst I live,
Into your guiding power. This is the man.
Why, then, young Bertram, take her; shes thy wife.
My wife, my liege! I shall beseech your highness,
In such a business give me leave to use
The help of mine own eyes.
Knowst thou not, Bertram,
What she has done for me?
Yes, my good lord;
But never hope to know why I should marry her.
Thou knowst she has raised me from my sickly bed.
But follows it, my lord, to bring me down
Must answer for your raising? I know her well:
She had her breeding at my fathers charge.
A poor physicians daughter my wife! Disdain
Rather corrupt me ever!
Tis only title thou disdainst in her, the which
I can build up. Strange is it that our bloods,
Of colour, weight, and heat, pourd all together,
Would quite confound distinction, yet stand off
In differences so mighty. If she be
All that is virtuous, save what thou dislikest,
A poor physicians daughter, thou dislikest
Of virtue for the name: but do not so:
From lowest place when virtuous things proceed,
The place is dignified by the doers deed:
Where great additions swells, and virtue none,
It is a dropsied honour. Good alone
Is good without a name. Vileness is so:
The property by what it is should go,
Not by the title. She is young, wise, fair;
In these to nature shes immediate heir,
And these breed honour: that is honours scorn,
Which challenges itself as honours born
And is not like the sire: honours thrive,
When rather from our acts we them derive
Than our foregoers: the mere words a slave
Deboshd on every tomb, on every grave
A lying trophy, and as oft is dumb
Where dust and damnd oblivion is the tomb
Of honourd bones indeed. What should be said?
If thou canst like this creature as a maid,
I can create the rest: virtue and she
Is her own dower; honour and wealth from me.
I cannot love her, nor will strive to dot.
Thou wrongst thyself, if thou shouldst strive to choose.
That you are well restored, my lord, Im glad:
Let the rest go.
My honours at the stake; which to defeat,
I must produce my power. Here, take her hand,
Proud scornful boy, unworthy this good gift;
That dost in vile misprision shackle up
My love and her desert; that canst not dream,
We, poising us in her defective scale,
Shall weigh thee to the beam; that wilt not know,
It is in us to plant thine honour where
We please to have it grow. Cheque thy contempt:
Obey our will, which travails in thy good:
Believe not thy disdain, but presently
Do thine own fortunes that obedient right
Which both thy duty owes and our power claims;
Or I will throw thee from my care for ever
Into the staggers and the careless lapse
Of youth and ignorance; both my revenge and hate
Loosing upon thee, in the name of justice,
Without all terms of pity. Speak; thine answer.
Pardon, my gracious lord; for I submit
My fancy to your eyes: when I consider
What great creation and what dole of honour
Flies where you bid it, I find that she, which late
Was in my nobler thoughts most base, is now
The praised of the king; who, so ennobled,
Is as twere born so.
Take her by the hand,
And tell her she is thine: to whom I promise
A counterpoise, if not to thy estate
A balance more replete.
I take her hand.
Good fortune and the favour of the king
Smile upon this contract; whose ceremony
Shall seem expedient on the now-born brief,
And be performd to-night: the solemn feast
Shall more attend upon the coming space,
Expecting absent friends. As thou lovest her,
Thy loves to me religious; else, does err.
Exeunt all but LAFEU and PAROLLES
[Advancing]  Do you hear, monsieur? a word with you.
Your pleasure, sir?
Your lord and master did well to make his
recantation.
Recantation! My lord! my master!
Ay; is it not a language I speak?
A most harsh one, and not to be understood without
bloody succeeding. My master!
Are you companion to the Count Rousillon?
To any count, to all counts, to what is man.
To what is counts man: counts master is of
another style.
You are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are too old.
I must tell thee, sirrah, I write man; to which
title age cannot bring thee.
What I dare too well do, I dare not do.
I did think thee, for two ordinaries, to be a pretty
wise fellow; thou didst make tolerable vent of thy
travel; it might pass: yet the scarfs and the
bannerets about thee did manifoldly dissuade me from
believing thee a vessel of too great a burthen. I
have now found thee; when I lose thee again, I care
not: yet art thou good for nothing but taking up; and
that thout scarce worth.
Hadst thou not the privilege of antiquity upon thee,--
Do not plunge thyself too far in anger, lest thou
hasten thy trial; which if--Lord have mercy on thee
for a hen! So, my good window of lattice, fare thee
well: thy casement I need not open, for I look
through thee. Give me thy hand.
My lord, you give me most egregious indignity.
Ay, with all my heart; and thou art worthy of it.
I have not, my lord, deserved it.
Yes, good faith, every dram of it; and I will not
bate thee a scruple.
Well, I shall be wiser.
Even as soon as thou canst, for thou hast to pull at
a smack o the contrary. If ever thou best bound
in thy scarf and beaten, thou shalt find what it is
to be proud of thy bondage. I have a desire to hold
my acquaintance with thee, or rather my knowledge,
that I may say in the default, he is a man I know.
My lord, you do me most insupportable vexation.
I would it were hell-pains for thy sake, and my poor
doing eternal: for doing I am past: as I will by
thee, in what motion age will give me leave.
Exit
Well, thou hast a son shall take this disgrace off
me; scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! Well, I must
be patient; there is no fettering of authority.
Ill beat him, by my life, if I can meet him with
any convenience, an he were double and double a
lord. Ill have no more pity of his age than I
would of--Ill beat him, an if I could but meet him again.
Re-enter LAFEU
Sirrah, your lord and masters married; theres news
for you: you have a new mistress.
I most unfeignedly beseech your lordship to make
some reservation of your wrongs: he is my good
lord: whom I serve above is my master.
Who? God?
Ay, sir.
The devil it is thats thy master. Why dost thou
garter up thy arms o this fashion? dost make hose of
sleeves? do other servants so? Thou wert best set
thy lower part where thy nose stands. By mine
honour, if I were but two hours younger, Ild beat
thee: methinks, thou art a general offence, and
every man should beat thee: I think thou wast
created for men to breathe themselves upon thee.
This is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.
Go to, sir; you were beaten in Italy for picking a
kernel out of a pomegranate; you are a vagabond and
no true traveller: you are more saucy with lords
and honourable personages than the commission of your
birth and virtue gives you heraldry. You are not
worth another word, else Ild call you knave. I leave you.
Exit
Good, very good; it is so then: good, very good;
let it be concealed awhile.
Re-enter BERTRAM
Undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
Whats the matter, sweet-heart?
Although before the solemn priest I have sworn,
I will not bed her.
What, what, sweet-heart?
O my Parolles, they have married me!
Ill to the Tuscan wars, and never bed her.
France is a dog-hole, and it no more merits
The tread of a mans foot: to the wars!
Theres letters from my mother: what the import is,
I know not yet.
Ay, that would be known. To the wars, my boy, to the wars!
He wears his honour in a box unseen,
That hugs his kicky-wicky here at home,
Spending his manly marrow in her arms,
Which should sustain the bound and high curvet
Of Marss fiery steed. To other regions
France is a stable; we that dwell int jades;
Therefore, to the war!
It shall be so: Ill send her to my house,
Acquaint my mother with my hate to her,
And wherefore I am fled; write to the king
That which I durst not speak; his present gift
Shall furnish me to those Italian fields,
Where noble fellows strike: war is no strife
To the dark house and the detested wife.
Will this capriccio hold in thee? art sure?
Go with me to my chamber, and advise me.
Ill send her straight away: to-morrow
Ill to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
Why, these balls bound; theres noise in it. Tis hard:
A young man married is a man thats marrd:
Therefore away, and leave her bravely; go:
The king has done you wrong: but, hush, tis so.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Paris. The KINGs palace.
Enter HELENA and Clown
My mother greets me kindly; is she well?
She is not well; but yet she has her health: shes
very merry; but yet she is not well: but thanks be
given, shes very well and wants nothing i, the
world; but yet she is not well.
If she be very well, what does she ail, that shes
not very well?
Truly, shes very well indeed, but for two things.
What two things?
One, that shes not in heaven, whither God send her
quickly! the other that shes in earth, from whence
God send her quickly!
Enter PAROLLES
Bless you, my fortunate lady!
I hope, sir, I have your good will to have mine own
good fortunes.
You had my prayers to lead them on; and to keep them
on, have them still. O, my knave, how does my old lady?
So that you had her wrinkles and I her money,
I would she did as you say.
Why, I say nothing.
Marry, you are the wiser man; for many a mans
tongue shakes out his masters undoing: to say
nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to have
nothing, is to be a great part of your title; which
is within a very little of nothing.
Away! thourt a knave.
You should have said, sir, before a knave thourt a
knave; thats, before me thourt a knave: this had
been truth, sir.
Go to, thou art a witty fool; I have found thee.
Did you find me in yourself, sir? or were you
taught to find me? The search, sir, was profitable;
and much fool may you find in you, even to the
worlds pleasure and the increase of laughter.
A good knave, i faith, and well fed.
Madam, my lord will go away to-night;
A very serious business calls on him.
The great prerogative and rite of love,
Which, as your due, time claims, he does acknowledge;
But puts it off to a compelld restraint;
Whose want, and whose delay, is strewd with sweets,
Which they distil now in the curbed time,
To make the coming hour oerflow with joy
And pleasure drown the brim.
Whats his will else?
That you will take your instant leave o the king
And make this haste as your own good proceeding,
Strengthend with what apology you think
May make it probable need.
What more commands he?
That, having this obtaind, you presently
Attend his further pleasure.
In every thing I wait upon his will.
I shall report it so.
I pray you.
Exit PAROLLES
Come, sirrah.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Paris. The KINGs palace.
Enter LAFEU and BERTRAM
But I hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.
Yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.
You have it from his own deliverance.
And by other warranted testimony.
Then my dial goes not true: I took this lark for a bunting.
I do assure you, my lord, he is very great in
knowledge and accordingly valiant.
I have then sinned against his experience and
transgressed against his valour; and my state that
way is dangerous, since I cannot yet find in my
heart to repent. Here he comes: I pray you, make
us friends; I will pursue the amity.
Enter PAROLLES
[To BERTRAM]  These things shall be done, sir.
Pray you, sir, whos his tailor?
Sir?
O, I know him well, I, sir; he, sir, s a good
workman, a very good tailor.
[Aside to PAROLLES]  Is she gone to the king?
She is.
Will she away to-night?
As youll have her.
I have writ my letters, casketed my treasure,
Given order for our horses; and to-night,
When I should take possession of the bride,
End ere I do begin.
A good traveller is something at the latter end of a
dinner; but one that lies three thirds and uses a
known truth to pass a thousand nothings with, should
be once heard and thrice beaten. God save you, captain.
Is there any unkindness between my lord and you, monsieur?
I know not how I have deserved to run into my lords
displeasure.
You have made shift to run into t, boots and spurs
and all, like him that leaped into the custard; and
out of it youll run again, rather than suffer
question for your residence.
It may be you have mistaken him, my lord.
And shall do so ever, though I took him at s
prayers. Fare you well, my lord; and believe this
of me, there can be no kernel in this light nut; the
soul of this man is his clothes. Trust him not in
matter of heavy consequence; I have kept of them
tame, and know their natures. Farewell, monsieur:
I have spoken better of you than you have or will to
deserve at my hand; but we must do good against evil.
Exit
An idle lord. I swear.
I think so.
Why, do you not know him?
Yes, I do know him well, and common speech
Gives him a worthy pass. Here comes my clog.
Enter HELENA
I have, sir, as I was commanded from you,
Spoke with the king and have procured his leave
For present parting; only he desires
Some private speech with you.
I shall obey his will.
You must not marvel, Helen, at my course,
Which holds not colour with the time, nor does
The ministration and required office
On my particular. Prepared I was not
For such a business; therefore am I found
So much unsettled: this drives me to entreat you
That presently you take our way for home;
And rather muse than ask why I entreat you,
For my respects are better than they seem
And my appointments have in them a need
Greater than shows itself at the first view
To you that know them not. This to my mother:
Giving a letter
