This handkercher was staind.
I pray you, tell it.
When last the young Orlando parted from you
He left a promise to return again
Within an hour, and pacing through the forest,
Chewing the food of sweet and bitter fancy,
Lo, what befell! he threw his eye aside,
And mark what object did present itself:
Under an oak, whose boughs were mossd with age
And high top bald with dry antiquity,
A wretched ragged man, oergrown with hair,
Lay sleeping on his back: about his neck
A green and gilded snake had wreathed itself,
Who with her head nimble in threats approachd
The opening of his mouth; but suddenly,
Seeing Orlando, it unlinkd itself,
And with indented glides did slip away
Into a bush: under which bushs shade
A lioness, with udders all drawn dry,
Lay couching, head on ground, with catlike watch,
When that the sleeping man should stir; for tis
The royal disposition of that beast
To prey on nothing that doth seem as dead:
This seen, Orlando did approach the man
And found it was his brother, his elder brother.
O, I have heard him speak of that same brother;
And he did render him the most unnatural
That lived amongst men.
And well he might so do,
For well I know he was unnatural.
But, to Orlando: did he leave him there,
Food to the suckd and hungry lioness?
Twice did he turn his back and purposed so;
But kindness, nobler ever than revenge,
And nature, stronger than his just occasion,
Made him give battle to the lioness,
Who quickly fell before him: in which hurtling
From miserable slumber I awaked.
Are you his brother?
Wast you he rescued?
Wast you that did so oft contrive to kill him?
Twas I; but tis not II do not shame
To tell you what I was, since my conversion
So sweetly tastes, being the thing I am.
But, for the bloody napkin?
By and by.
When from the first to last betwixt us two
Tears our recountments had most kindly bathed,
As how I came into that desert place:--
In brief, he led me to the gentle duke,
Who gave me fresh array and entertainment,
Committing me unto my brothers love;
Who led me instantly unto his cave,
There strippd himself, and here upon his arm
The lioness had torn some flesh away,
Which all this while had bled; and now he fainted
And cried, in fainting, upon Rosalind.
Brief, I recoverd him, bound up his wound;
And, after some small space, being strong at heart,
He sent me hither, stranger as I am,
To tell this story, that you might excuse
His broken promise, and to give this napkin
Dyed in his blood unto the shepherd youth
That he in sport doth call his Rosalind.
ROSALIND swoons
Why, how now, Ganymede! sweet Ganymede!
Many will swoon when they do look on blood.
There is more in it. Cousin Ganymede!
Look, he recovers.
I would I were at home.
Well lead you thither.
I pray you, will you take him by the arm?
Be of good cheer, youth: you a man! you lack a
mans heart.
I do so, I confess it. Ah, sirrah, a body would
think this was well counterfeited! I pray you, tell
your brother how well I counterfeited. Heigh-ho!
This was not counterfeit: there is too great
testimony in your complexion that it was a passion
of earnest.
Counterfeit, I assure you.
Well then, take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man.
So I do: but, i faith, I should have been a woman by right.
Come, you look paler and paler: pray you, draw
homewards. Good sir, go with us.
That will I, for I must bear answer back
How you excuse my brother, Rosalind.
I shall devise something: but, I pray you, commend
my counterfeiting to him. Will you go?
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. The forest.
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
We shall find a time, Audrey; patience, gentle Audrey.
Faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old
gentlemans saying.
A most wicked Sir Oliver, Audrey, a most vile
Martext. But, Audrey, there is a youth here in the
forest lays claim to you.
Ay, I know who tis; he hath no interest in me in
the world: here comes the man you mean.
It is meat and drink to me to see a clown: by my
troth, we that have good wits have much to answer
for; we shall be flouting; we cannot hold.
Enter WILLIAM
Good even, Audrey.
God ye good even, William.
And good even to you, sir.
Good even, gentle friend. Cover thy head, cover thy
head; nay, prithee, be covered. How old are you, friend?
Five and twenty, sir.
A ripe age. Is thy name William?
William, sir.
A fair name. Wast born i the forest here?
Ay, sir, I thank God.
Thank God; a good answer. Art rich?
Faith, sir, so so.
So so is good, very good, very excellent good; and
yet it is not; it is but so so. Art thou wise?
Ay, sir, I have a pretty wit.
Why, thou sayest well. I do now remember a saying,
The fool doth think he is wise, but the wise man
knows himself to be a fool. The heathen
philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape,
would open his lips when he put it into his mouth;
meaning thereby that grapes were made to eat and
lips to open. You do love this maid?
I do, sir.
Give me your hand. Art thou learned?
No, sir.
Then learn this of me: to have, is to have; for it
is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being poured out
of a cup into a glass, by filling the one doth empty
the other; for all your writers do consent that ipse
is he: now, you are not ipse, for I am he.
Which he, sir?
He, sir, that must marry this woman. Therefore, you
clown, abandon,--which is in the vulgar leave,--the
society,--which in the boorish is company,--of this
female,--which in the common is woman; which
together is, abandon the society of this female, or,
clown, thou perishest; or, to thy better
understanding, diest; or, to wit I kill thee, make
thee away, translate thy life into death, thy
liberty into bondage: I will deal in poison with
thee, or in bastinado, or in steel; I will bandy
with thee in faction; I will oerrun thee with
policy; I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways:
therefore tremble and depart.
Do, good William.
God rest you merry, sir.
Exit
Enter CORIN
Our master and mistress seeks you; come, away, away!
Trip, Audrey! trip, Audrey! I attend, I attend.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The forest.
Enter ORLANDO and OLIVER
Ist possible that on so little acquaintance you
should like her? that but seeing you should love
her? and loving woo? and, wooing, she should
grant? and will you persever to enjoy her?
Neither call the giddiness of it in question, the
poverty of her, the small acquaintance, my sudden
wooing, nor her sudden consenting; but say with me,
I love Aliena; say with her that she loves me;
consent with both that we may enjoy each other: it
shall be to your good; for my fathers house and all
the revenue that was old Sir Rowlands will I
estate upon you, and here live and die a shepherd.
You have my consent. Let your wedding be to-morrow:
thither will I invite the duke and alls contented
followers. Go you and prepare Aliena; for look
you, here comes my Rosalind.
Enter ROSALIND
God save you, brother.
And you, fair sister.
Exit
O, my dear Orlando, how it grieves me to see thee
wear thy heart in a scarf!
It is my arm.
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws
of a lion.
Wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
Did your brother tell you how I counterfeited to
swoon when he showed me your handkerchief?
Ay, and greater wonders than that.
O, I know where you are: nay, tis true: there was
never any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams
and Caesars thrasonical brag of I came, saw, and
overcame: for your brother and my sister no sooner
met but they looked, no sooner looked but they
loved, no sooner loved but they sighed, no sooner
sighed but they asked one another the reason, no
sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy;
and in these degrees have they made a pair of stairs
to marriage which they will climb incontinent, or
else be incontinent before marriage: they are in
the very wrath of love and they will together; clubs
cannot part them.
They shall be married to-morrow, and I will bid the
duke to the nuptial. But, O, how bitter a thing it
is to look into happiness through another mans
eyes! By so much the more shall I to-morrow be at
the height of heart-heaviness, by how much I shall
think my brother happy in having what he wishes for.
Why then, to-morrow I cannot serve your turn for Rosalind?
I can live no longer by thinking.
I will weary you then no longer with idle talking.
Know of me then, for now I speak to some purpose,
that I know you are a gentleman of good conceit: I
speak not this that you should bear a good opinion
of my knowledge, insomuch I say I know you are;
neither do I labour for a greater esteem than may in
some little measure draw a belief from you, to do
yourself good and not to grace me. Believe then, if
you please, that I can do strange things: I have,
since I was three year old, conversed with a
magician, most profound in his art and yet not
damnable. If you do love Rosalind so near the heart
as your gesture cries it out, when your brother
marries Aliena, shall you marry her: I know into
what straits of fortune she is driven; and it is
not impossible to me, if it appear not inconvenient
to you, to set her before your eyes tomorrow human
as she is and without any danger.
Speakest thou in sober meanings?
By my life, I do; which I tender dearly, though I
say I am a magician. Therefore, put you in your
best array: bid your friends; for if you will be
married to-morrow, you shall, and to Rosalind, if you will.
Enter SILVIUS and PHEBE
Look, here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers.
Youth, you have done me much ungentleness,
To show the letter that I writ to you.
I care not if I have: it is my study
To seem despiteful and ungentle to you:
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd;
Look upon him, love him; he worships you.
Good shepherd, tell this youth what tis to love.
It is to be all made of sighs and tears;
And so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of faith and service;
And so am I for Phebe.
And I for Ganymede.
And I for Rosalind.
And I for no woman.
It is to be all made of fantasy,
All made of passion and all made of wishes,
All adoration, duty, and observance,
All humbleness, all patience and impatience,
All purity, all trial, all observance;
And so am I for Phebe.
And so am I for Ganymede.
And so am I for Rosalind.
And so am I for no woman.
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
If this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Who do you speak to, Why blame you me to love you?
To her that is not here, nor doth not hear.
Pray you, no more of this; tis like the howling
of Irish wolves against the moon.
To SILVIUS
I will help you, if I can:
To PHEBE
I would love you, if I could. To-morrow meet me all together.
To PHEBE
I will marry you, if ever I marry woman, and Ill be
married to-morrow:
To ORLANDO
I will satisfy you, if ever I satisfied man, and you
shall be married to-morrow:
To SILVIUS
I will content you, if what pleases you contents
you, and you shall be married to-morrow.
To ORLANDO
As you love Rosalind, meet:
To SILVIUS
as you love Phebe, meet: and as I love no woman,
Ill meet. So fare you well: I have left you commands.
Ill not fail, if I live.
Nor I.
Nor I.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The forest.
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
To-morrow is the joyful day, Audrey; to-morrow will
we be married.
I do desire it with all my heart; and I hope it is
no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the
world. Here comes two of the banished dukes pages.
Enter two Pages
Well met, honest gentleman.
By my troth, well met. Come, sit, sit, and a song.
We are for you: sit i the middle.
Shall we clap intot roundly, without hawking or
spitting or saying we are hoarse, which are the only
prologues to a bad voice?
Ifaith, ifaith; and both in a tune, like two
gipsies on a horse.
SONG.
It was a lover and his lass,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
That oer the green corn-field did pass
In the spring time, the only pretty ring time,
When birds do sing, hey ding a ding, ding:
Sweet lovers love the spring.
Between the acres of the rye,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino
These pretty country folks would lie,
In spring time,  and c.
This carol they began that hour,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino,
How that a life was but a flower
In spring time,  and c.
And therefore take the present time,
With a hey, and a ho, and a hey nonino;
For love is crowned with the prime
In spring time,  and c.
Truly, young gentlemen, though there was no great
matter in the ditty, yet the note was very
untuneable.
You are deceived, sir: we kept time, we lost not our time.
By my troth, yes; I count it but time lost to hear
such a foolish song. God be wi you; and God mend
your voices! Come, Audrey.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The forest.
Enter DUKE SENIOR, AMIENS, JAQUES, ORLANDO, OLIVER, and CELIA
Dost thou believe, Orlando, that the boy
Can do all this that he hath promised?
I sometimes do believe, and sometimes do not;
As those that fear they hope, and know they fear.
Enter ROSALIND, SILVIUS, and PHEBE
Patience once more, whiles our compact is urged:
You say, if I bring in your Rosalind,
You will bestow her on Orlando here?
That would I, had I kingdoms to give with her.
And you say, you will have her, when I bring her?
That would I, were I of all kingdoms king.
You say, youll marry me, if I be willing?
That will I, should I die the hour after.
But if you do refuse to marry me,
Youll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
So is the bargain.
You say, that youll have Phebe, if she will?
Though to have her and death were both one thing.
I have promised to make all this matter even.
Keep you your word, O duke, to give your daughter;
You yours, Orlando, to receive his daughter:
Keep your word, Phebe, that youll marry me,
Or else refusing me, to wed this shepherd:
Keep your word, Silvius, that youll marry her.
If she refuse me: and from hence I go,
To make these doubts all even.
Exeunt ROSALIND and CELIA
I do remember in this shepherd boy
Some lively touches of my daughters favour.
My lord, the first time that I ever saw him
Methought he was a brother to your daughter:
But, my good lord, this boy is forest-born,
And hath been tutord in the rudiments
Of many desperate studies by his uncle,
Whom he reports to be a great magician,
Obscured in the circle of this forest.
Enter TOUCHSTONE and AUDREY
There is, sure, another flood toward, and these
couples are coming to the ark. Here comes a pair of
very strange beasts, which in all tongues are called fools.
Salutation and greeting to you all!
Good my lord, bid him welcome: this is the
motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in
the forest: he hath been a courtier, he swears.
If any man doubt that, let him put me to my
purgation. I have trod a measure; I have flattered
a lady; I have been politic with my friend, smooth
with mine enemy; I have undone three tailors; I have
had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.
And how was that taen up?
Faith, we met, and found the quarrel was upon the
seventh cause.
How seventh cause? Good my lord, like this fellow.
I like him very well.
God ild you, sir; I desire you of the like. I
press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country
copulatives, to swear and to forswear: according as
marriage binds and blood breaks: a poor virgin,
sir, an ill-favoured thing, sir, but mine own; a poor
humour of mine, sir, to take that that no man else
will: rich honesty dwells like a miser, sir, in a
poor house; as your pearl in your foul oyster.
By my faith, he is very swift and sententious.
According to the fools bolt, sir, and such dulcet diseases.
But, for the seventh cause; how did you find the
quarrel on the seventh cause?
Upon a lie seven times removed:--bear your body more
seeming, Audrey:--as thus, sir. I did dislike the
cut of a certain courtiers beard: he sent me word,
if I said his beard was not cut well, he was in the
mind it was: this is called the Retort Courteous.
If I sent him word again it was not well cut, he
would send me word, he cut it to please himself:
this is called the Quip Modest. If again it was
not well cut, he disabled my judgment: this is
called the Reply Churlish. If again it was not
well cut, he would answer, I spake not true: this
is called the Reproof Valiant. If again it was not
well cut, he would say I lied: this is called the
Counter-cheque Quarrelsome: and so to the Lie
Circumstantial and the Lie Direct.
And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut?
I durst go no further than the Lie Circumstantial,
nor he durst not give me the Lie Direct; and so we
measured swords and parted.
Can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?
O sir, we quarrel in print, by the book; as you have
books for good manners: I will name you the degrees.
The first, the Retort Courteous; the second, the
Quip Modest; the third, the Reply Churlish; the
fourth, the Reproof Valiant; the fifth, the
Countercheque Quarrelsome; the sixth, the Lie with
Circumstance; the seventh, the Lie Direct. All
these you may avoid but the Lie Direct; and you may
avoid that too, with an If. I knew when seven
justices could not take up a quarrel, but when the
parties were met themselves, one of them thought but
of an If, as, If you said so, then I said so; and
they shook hands and swore brothers. Your If is the
only peacemaker; much virtue in If.
Is not this a rare fellow, my lord? hes as good at
any thing and yet a fool.
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse and under
the presentation of that he shoots his wit.
Enter HYMEN, ROSALIND, and CELIA
Still Music
Then is there mirth in heaven,
When earthly things made even
Atone together.
Good duke, receive thy daughter
Hymen from heaven brought her,
Yea, brought her hither,
That thou mightst join her hand with his
Whose heart within his bosom is.
[To DUKE SENIOR]  To you I give myself, for I am yours.
To ORLANDO
To you I give myself, for I am yours.
If there be truth in sight, you are my daughter.
If there be truth in sight, you are my Rosalind.
If sight and shape be true,
Why then, my love adieu!
Ill have no father, if you be not he:
Ill have no husband, if you be not he:
Nor neer wed woman, if you be not she.
Peace, ho! I bar confusion:
Tis I must make conclusion
Of these most strange events:
Heres eight that must take hands
To join in Hymens bands,
If truth holds true contents.
You and you no cross shall part:
You and you are heart in heart
You to his love must accord,
Or have a woman to your lord:
You and you are sure together,
As the winter to foul weather.
Whiles a wedlock-hymn we sing,
Feed yourselves with questioning;
That reason wonder may diminish,
How thus we met, and these things finish.
SONG.
Wedding is great Junos crown:
O blessed bond of board and bed!
Tis Hymen peoples every town;
High wedlock then be honoured:
Honour, high honour and renown,
To Hymen, god of every town!
O my dear niece, welcome thou art to me!
Even daughter, welcome, in no less degree.
I will not eat my word, now thou art mine;
Thy faith my fancy to thee doth combine.
Enter JAQUES DE BOYS
Let me have audience for a word or two:
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland,
That bring these tidings to this fair assembly.
Duke Frederick, hearing how that every day
Men of great worth resorted to this forest,
Addressd a mighty power; which were on foot,
In his own conduct, purposely to take
His brother here and put him to the sword:
And to the skirts of this wild wood he came;
Where meeting with an old religious man,
After some question with him, was converted
Both from his enterprise and from the world,
His crown bequeathing to his banishd brother,
And all their lands restored to them again
That were with him exiled. This to be true,
I do engage my life.
Welcome, young man;
Thou offerst fairly to thy brothers wedding:
To one his lands withheld, and to the other
A land itself at large, a potent dukedom.
First, in this forest, let us do those ends
That here were well begun and well begot:
And after, every of this happy number
That have endured shrewd days and nights with us
Shall share the good of our returned fortune,
According to the measure of their states.
Meantime, forget this new-falln dignity
And fall into our rustic revelry.
Play, music! And you, brides and bridegrooms all,
With measure heapd in joy, to the measures fall.
Sir, by your patience. If I heard you rightly,
The duke hath put on a religious life
And thrown into neglect the pompous court?
He hath.
To him will I : out of these convertites
There is much matter to be heard and learnd.
To DUKE SENIOR
You to your former honour I bequeath;
Your patience and your virtue well deserves it:
To ORLANDO
You to a love that your true faith doth merit:
To OLIVER
You to your land and love and great allies:
To SILVIUS
You to a long and well-deserved bed:
To TOUCHSTONE
And you to wrangling; for thy loving voyage
Is but for two months victualld. So, to your pleasures:
I am for other than for dancing measures.
Stay, Jaques, stay.
To see no pastime Iwhat you would have
Ill stay to know at your abandond cave.
Exit
Proceed, proceed: we will begin these rites,
As we do trust theyll end, in true delights.
A dance
EPILOGUE
It is not the fashion to see the lady the epilogue;
but it is no more unhandsome than to see the lord
the prologue. If it be true that good wine needs
no bush, tis true that a good play needs no
epilogue; yet to good wine they do use good bushes,
and good plays prove the better by the help of good
epilogues. What a case am I in then, that am
neither a good epilogue nor cannot insinuate with
you in the behalf of a good play! I am not
furnished like a beggar, therefore to beg will not
become me: my way is to conjure you; and Ill begin
with the women. I charge you, O women, for the love
you bear to men, to like as much of this play as
please you: and I charge you, O men, for the love
you bear to women--as I perceive by your simpering,
none of you hates them--that between you and the
women the play may please. If I were a woman I
would kiss as many of you as had beards that pleased
me, complexions that liked me and breaths that I
defied not: and, I am sure, as many as have good
beards or good faces or sweet breaths will, for my
kind offer, when I make curtsy, bid me farewell.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Alexandria. A room in CLEOPATRAs palace.
Enter DEMETRIUS and PHILO
Nay, but this dotage of our generals
Oerflows the measure: those his goodly eyes,
That oer the files and musters of the war
Have glowd like plated Mars, now bend, now turn,
The office and devotion of their view
Upon a tawny front: his captains heart,
Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst
The buckles on his breast, reneges all temper,
And is become the bellows and the fan
To cool a gipsys lust.
Flourish. Enter ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, her Ladies, the Train, with Eunuchs fanning her
Look, where they come:
Take but good note, and you shall see in him.
The triple pillar of the world transformd
Into a strumpets fool: behold and see.
If it be love indeed, tell me how much.
Theres beggary in the love that can be reckond.
Ill set a bourn how far to be beloved.
Then must thou needs find out new heaven, new earth.
Enter an Attendant
News, my good lord, from Rome.
Grates me: the sum.
Nay, hear them, Antony:
Fulvia perchance is angry; or, who knows
If the scarce-bearded Caesar have not sent
His powerful mandate to you, Do this, or this;
Take in that kingdom, and enfranchise that;
Perform t, or else we damn thee.
How, my love!
Perchance! nay, and most like:
You must not stay here longer, your dismission
Is come from Caesar; therefore hear it, Antony.
Wheres Fulvias process? Caesars I would say? both?
Call in the messengers. As I am Egypts queen,
Thou blushest, Antony; and that blood of thine
Is Caesars homager: else so thy cheek pays shame
When shrill-tongued Fulvia scolds. The messengers!
Let Rome in Tiber melt, and the wide arch
Of the ranged empire fall! Here is my space.
Kingdoms are clay: our dungy earth alike
Feeds beast as man: the nobleness of life
Is to do thus; when such a mutual pair
Embracing
And such a twain can dot, in which I bind,
On pain of punishment, the world to weet
We stand up peerless.
Excellent falsehood!
Why did he marry Fulvia, and not love her?
Ill seem the fool I am not; Antony
Will be himself.
But stirrd by Cleopatra.
Now, for the love of Love and her soft hours,
Lets not confound the time with conference harsh:
Theres not a minute of our lives should stretch
Without some pleasure now. What sport tonight?
Hear the ambassadors.
Fie, wrangling queen!
Whom every thing becomes, to chide, to laugh,
To weep; whose every passion fully strives
To make itself, in thee, fair and admired!
No messenger, but thine; and all alone
To-night well wander through the streets and note
The qualities of people. Come, my queen;
Last night you did desire it: speak not to us.
Exeunt MARK ANTONY and CLEOPATRA with their train
Is Caesar with Antonius prized so slight?
Sir, sometimes, when he is not Antony,
He comes too short of that great property
Which still should go with Antony.
I am full sorry
That he approves the common liar, who
Thus speaks of him at Rome: but I will hope
Of better deeds to-morrow. Rest you happy!
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. Another room.
Enter CHARMIAN, IRAS, ALEXAS, and a Soothsayer
Lord Alexas, sweet Alexas, most any thing Alexas,
almost most absolute Alexas, wheres the soothsayer
that you praised so to the queen? O, that I knew
this husband, which, you say, must charge his horns
with garlands!
Soothsayer!
Your will?
Is this the man? Ist you, sir, that know things?
In natures infinite book of secrecy
A little I can read.
Show him your hand.
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Bring in the banquet quickly; wine enough
Cleopatras health to drink.
Good sir, give me good fortune.
I make not, but foresee.
Pray, then, foresee me one.
You shall be yet far fairer than you are.
He means in flesh.
No, you shall paint when you are old.
Wrinkles forbid!
Vex not his prescience; be attentive.
Hush!
You shall be more beloving than beloved.
I had rather heat my liver with drinking.
Nay, hear him.
Good now, some excellent fortune! Let me be married
to three kings in a forenoon, and widow them all:
let me have a child at fifty, to whom Herod of Jewry
may do homage: find me to marry me with Octavius
Caesar, and companion me with my mistress.
You shall outlive the lady whom you serve.
O excellent! I love long life better than figs.
You have seen and proved a fairer former fortune
Than that which is to approach.
Then belike my children shall have no names:
prithee, how many boys and wenches must I have?
If every of your wishes had a womb.
And fertile every wish, a million.
Out, fool! I forgive thee for a witch.
You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes.
Nay, come, tell Iras hers.
Well know all our fortunes.
Mine, and most of our fortunes, to-night, shall
be--drunk to bed.
Theres a palm presages chastity, if nothing else.
Een as the oerflowing Nilus presageth famine.
Go, you wild bedfellow, you cannot soothsay.
Nay, if an oily palm be not a fruitful
prognostication, I cannot scratch mine ear. Prithee,
tell her but a worky-day fortune.
Your fortunes are alike.
But how, but how? give me particulars.
I have said.
Am I not an inch of fortune better than she?
Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better than
I, where would you choose it?
Not in my husbands nose.
Our worser thoughts heavens mend! Alexas,--come,
his fortune, his fortune! O, let him marry a woman
that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech thee! and let
her die too, and give him a worse! and let worst
follow worse, till the worst of all follow him
laughing to his grave, fifty-fold a cuckold! Good
Isis, hear me this prayer, though thou deny me a
matter of more weight; good Isis, I beseech thee!
Amen. Dear goddess, hear that prayer of the people!
for, as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man
loose-wived, so it is a deadly sorrow to behold a
foul knave uncuckolded: therefore, dear Isis, keep
decorum, and fortune him accordingly!
Amen.
Lo, now, if it lay in their hands to make me a
cuckold, they would make themselves whores, but
theyld dot!
Hush! here comes Antony.
Not he; the queen.
Enter CLEOPATRA
Saw you my lord?
No, lady.
Was he not here?
No, madam.
He was disposed to mirth; but on the sudden
A Roman thought hath struck him. Enobarbus!
Madam?
Seek him, and bring him hither.
Wheres Alexas?
Here, at your service. My lord approaches.
We will not look upon him: go with us.
Exeunt
Enter MARK ANTONY with a Messenger and Attendants
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field.
Against my brother Lucius?
Ay:
But soon that war had end, and the times state
Made friends of them, joining their force gainst Caesar;
Whose better issue in the war, from Italy,
Upon the first encounter, drave them.
Well, what worst?
The nature of bad news infects the teller.
When it concerns the fool or coward. On:
Things that are past are done with me. Tis thus:
Who tells me true, though in his tale lie death,
I hear him as he flatterd.
Labienus--
This is stiff news--hath, with his Parthian force,
Extended Asia from Euphrates;
His conquering banner shook from Syria
To Lydia and to Ionia; Whilst--
Antony, thou wouldst say,--
O, my lord!
Speak to me home, mince not the general tongue:
Name Cleopatra as she is calld in Rome;
Rail thou in Fulvias phrase; and taunt my faults
With such full licence as both truth and malice
Have power to utter. O, then we bring forth weeds,
When our quick minds lie still; and our ills told us
Is as our earing. Fare thee well awhile.
At your noble pleasure.
Exit
From Sicyon, ho, the news! Speak there!
The man from Sicyon,--is there such an one?
He stays upon your will.
Let him appear.
These strong Egyptian fetters I must break,
Or lose myself in dotage.
Enter another Messenger
What are you?
Fulvia thy wife is dead.
Where died she?
In Sicyon:
Her length of sickness, with what else more serious
Importeth thee to know, this bears.
Gives a letter
Forbear me.
Exit Second Messenger
Theres a great spirit gone! Thus did I desire it:
What our contempt doth often hurl from us,
We wish it ours again; the present pleasure,
By revolution lowering, does become
The opposite of itself: shes good, being gone;
The hand could pluck her back that shoved her on.
I must from this enchanting queen break off:
Ten thousand harms, more than the ills I know,
My idleness doth hatch. How now! Enobarbus!
Re-enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Whats your pleasure, sir?
I must with haste from hence.
Why, then, we kill all our women:
we see how mortal an unkindness is to them;
if they suffer our departure, deaths the word.
I must be gone.
Under a compelling occasion, let women die; it were
pity to cast them away for nothing; though, between
them and a great cause, they should be esteemed
nothing. Cleopatra, catching but the least noise of
this, dies instantly; I have seen her die twenty
times upon far poorer moment: I do think there is
mettle in death, which commits some loving act upon
her, she hath such a celerity in dying.
She is cunning past mans thought.
Exit ALEXAS
Alack, sir, no; her passions are made of nothing but
the finest part of pure love: we cannot call her
winds and waters sighs and tears; they are greater
storms and tempests than almanacs can report: this
cannot be cunning in her; if it be, she makes a
shower of rain as well as Jove.
Would I had never seen her.
O, sir, you had then left unseen a wonderful piece
of work; which not to have been blest withal would
have discredited your travel.
Fulvia is dead.
Sir?
Fulvia is dead.
Fulvia!
Dead.
Why, sir, give the gods a thankful sacrifice. When
it pleaseth their deities to take the wife of a man
from him, it shows to man the tailors of the earth;
comforting therein, that when old robes are worn
out, there are members to make new. If there were
no more women but Fulvia, then had you indeed a cut,
and the case to be lamented: this grief is crowned
with consolation; your old smock brings forth a new
petticoat: and indeed the tears live in an onion
that should water this sorrow.
The business she hath broached in the state
Cannot endure my absence.
And the business you have broached here cannot be
without you; especially that of Cleopatras, which
wholly depends on your abode.
No more light answers. Let our officers
Have notice what we purpose. I shall break
The cause of our expedience to the queen,
And get her leave to part. For not alone
The death of Fulvia, with more urgent touches,
Do strongly speak to us; but the letters too
Of many our contriving friends in Rome
Petition us at home: Sextus Pompeius
Hath given the dare to Caesar, and commands
The empire of the sea: our slippery people,
Whose love is never linkd to the deserver
Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
Pompey the Great and all his dignities
Upon his son; who, high in name and power,
Higher than both in blood and life, stands up
For the main soldier: whose quality, going on,
The sides o the world may danger: much is breeding,
Which, like the coursers hair, hath yet but life,
And not a serpents poison. Say, our pleasure,
To such whose place is under us, requires
Our quick remove from hence.
I shall dot.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. Another room.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS
Where is he?
I did not see him since.
See where he is, whos with him, what he does:
I did not send you: if you find him sad,
Say I am dancing; if in mirth, report
That I am sudden sick: quick, and return.
Exit ALEXAS
Madam, methinks, if you did love him dearly,
You do not hold the method to enforce
The like from him.
What should I do, I do not?
In each thing give him way, cross him nothing.
Thou teachest like a fool; the way to lose him.
Tempt him not so too far; I wish, forbear:
In time we hate that which we often fear.
But here comes Antony.
Enter MARK ANTONY
I am sick and sullen.
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose,--
Help me away, dear Charmian; I shall fall:
It cannot be thus long, the sides of nature
Will not sustain it.
Now, my dearest queen,--
Pray you, stand further from me.
Whats the matter?
I know, by that same eye, theres some good news.
What says the married woman? You may go:
Would she had never given you leave to come!
Let her not say tis I that keep you here:
I have no power upon you; hers you are.
The gods best know,--
O, never was there queen
So mightily betrayd! yet at the first
I saw the treasons planted.
Cleopatra,--
Why should I think you can be mine and true,
Though you in swearing shake the throned gods,
Who have been false to Fulvia? Riotous madness,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vows,
Which break themselves in swearing!
Most sweet queen,--
Nay, pray you, seek no colour for your going,
But bid farewell, and go: when you sued staying,
Then was the time for words: no going then;
Eternity was in our lips and eyes,
Bliss in our brows bent; none our parts so poor,
But was a race of heaven: they are so still,
Or thou, the greatest soldier of the world,
Art turnd the greatest liar.
How now, lady!
I would I had thy inches; thou shouldst know
There were a heart in Egypt.
Hear me, queen:
The strong necessity of time commands
Our services awhile; but my full heart
Remains in use with you. Our Italy
Shines oer with civil swords: Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the port of Rome:
Equality of two domestic powers
Breed scrupulous faction: the hated, grown to strength,
Are newly grown to love: the condemnd Pompey,
Rich in his fathers honour, creeps apace,
Into the hearts of such as have not thrived
Upon the present state, whose numbers threaten;
And quietness, grown sick of rest, would purge
By any desperate change: my more particular,
And that which most with you should safe my going,
Is Fulvias death.
Though age from folly could not give me freedom,
It does from childishness: can Fulvia die?
Shes dead, my queen:
Look here, and at thy sovereign leisure read
The garboils she awaked; at the last, best:
See when and where she died.
O most false love!
Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill
With sorrowful water? Now I see, I see,
In Fulvias death, how mine received shall be.
Quarrel no more, but be prepared to know
The purposes I bear; which are, or cease,
As you shall give the advice. By the fire
That quickens Nilus slime, I go from hence
Thy soldier, servant; making peace or war
As thou affectst.
Cut my lace, Charmian, come;
But let it be: I am quickly ill, and well,
So Antony loves.
My precious queen, forbear;
And give true evidence to his love, which stands
An honourable trial.
So Fulvia told me.
I prithee, turn aside and weep for her,
Then bid adieu to me, and say the tears
Belong to Egypt: good now, play one scene
Of excellent dissembling; and let it look
Life perfect honour.
Youll heat my blood: no more.
You can do better yet; but this is meetly.
Now, by my sword,--
And target. Still he mends;
But this is not the best. Look, prithee, Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman does become
The carriage of his chafe.
Ill leave you, lady.
Courteous lord, one word.
Sir, you and I must part, but thats not it:
Sir, you and I have loved, but theres not it;
That you know well: something it is I would,
O, my oblivion is a very Antony,
And I am all forgotten.
But that your royalty
Holds idleness your subject, I should take you
For idleness itself.
Tis sweating labour
To bear such idleness so near the heart
As Cleopatra this. But, sir, forgive me;
Since my becomings kill me, when they do not
Eye well to you: your honour calls you hence;
Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly.
And all the gods go with you! upon your sword
Sit laurel victory! and smooth success
Be strewd before your feet!
Let us go. Come;
Our separation so abides, and flies,
That thou, residing here, gost yet with me,
And I, hence fleeting, here remain with thee. Away!
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Rome. OCTAVIUS CAESARs house.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, reading a letter, LEPIDUS, and their Train
You may see, Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caesars natural vice to hate
Our great competitor: from Alexandria
This is the news: he fishes, drinks, and wastes
The lamps of night in revel; is not more man-like
Than Cleopatra; nor the queen of Ptolemy
More womanly than he; hardly gave audience, or
Vouchsafed to think he had partners: you shall find there
A man who is the abstract of all faults
That all men follow.
