I must not think there are
Evils enow to darken all his goodness:
His faults in him seem as the spots of heaven,
More fiery by nights blackness; hereditary,
Rather than purchased; what he cannot change,
Than what he chooses.
You are too indulgent. Let us grant, it is not
Amiss to tumble on the bed of Ptolemy;
To give a kingdom for a mirth; to sit
And keep the turn of tippling with a slave;
To reel the streets at noon, and stand the buffet
With knaves that smell of sweat: say this
becomes him,--
As his composure must be rare indeed
Whom these things cannot blemish,--yet must Antony
No way excuse his soils, when we do bear
So great weight in his lightness. If he filld
His vacancy with his voluptuousness,
Full surfeits, and the dryness of his bones,
Call on him fort: but to confound such time,
That drums him from his sport, and speaks as loud
As his own state and ours,--tis to be chid
As we rate boys, who, being mature in knowledge,
Pawn their experience to their present pleasure,
And so rebel to judgment.
Enter a Messenger
Heres more news.
Thy biddings have been done; and every hour,
Most noble Caesar, shalt thou have report
How tis abroad. Pompey is strong at sea;
And it appears he is beloved of those
That only have feard Caesar: to the ports
The discontents repair, and mens reports
Give him much wrongd.
I should have known no less.
It hath been taught us from the primal state,
That he which is was wishd until he were;
And the ebbd man, neer loved till neer worth love,
Comes deard by being lackd. This common body,
Like to a vagabond flag upon the stream,
Goes to and back, lackeying the varying tide,
To rot itself with motion.
Caesar, I bring thee word,
Menecrates and Menas, famous pirates,
Make the sea serve them, which they ear and wound
With keels of every kind: many hot inroads
They make in Italy; the borders maritime
Lack blood to think ont, and flush youth revolt:
No vessel can peep forth, but tis as soon
Taken as seen; for Pompeys name strikes more
Than could his war resisted.
Antony,
Leave thy lascivious wassails. When thou once
Wast beaten from Modena, where thou slewst
Hirtius and Pansa, consuls, at thy heel
Did famine follow; whom thou foughtst against,
Though daintily brought up, with patience more
Than savages could suffer: thou didst drink
The stale of horses, and the gilded puddle
Which beasts would cough at: thy palate then did deign
The roughest berry on the rudest hedge;
Yea, like the stag, when snow the pasture sheets,
The barks of trees thou browsedst; on the Alps
It is reported thou didst eat strange flesh,
Which some did die to look on: and all this--
It wounds thine honour that I speak it now--
Was borne so like a soldier, that thy cheek
So much as lankd not.
Tis pity of him.
Let his shames quickly
Drive him to Rome: tis time we twain
Did show ourselves i the field; and to that end
Assemble we immediate council: Pompey
Thrives in our idleness.
To-morrow, Caesar,
I shall be furnishd to inform you rightly
Both what by sea and land I can be able
To front this present time.
Till which encounter,
It is my business too. Farewell.
Farewell, my lord: what you shall know meantime
Of stirs abroad, I shall beseech you, sir,
To let me be partaker.
Doubt not, sir;
I knew it for my bond.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Alexandria. CLEOPATRAs palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN
Charmian!
Madam?
Ha, ha!
Give me to drink mandragora.
Why, madam?
That I might sleep out this great gap of time
My Antony is away.
You think of him too much.
O, tis treason!
Madam, I trust, not so.
Thou, eunuch Mardian!
Whats your highness pleasure?
Not now to hear thee sing; I take no pleasure
In aught an eunuch has: tis well for thee,
That, being unseminard, thy freer thoughts
May not fly forth of Egypt. Hast thou affections?
Yes, gracious madam.
Indeed!
Not in deed, madam; for I can do nothing
But what indeed is honest to be done:
Yet have I fierce affections, and think
What Venus did with Mars.
O Charmian,
Where thinkst thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walk? or is he on his horse?
O happy horse, to bear the weight of Antony!
Do bravely, horse! for wotst thou whom thou movest?
The demi-Atlas of this earth, the arm
And burgonet of men. Hes speaking now,
Or murmuring Wheres my serpent of old Nile?
For so he calls me: now I feed myself
With most delicious poison. Think on me,
That am with Phoebus amorous pinches black,
And wrinkled deep in time? Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou wast here above the ground, I was
A morsel for a monarch: and great Pompey
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow;
There would he anchor his aspect and die
With looking on his life.
Enter ALEXAS, from OCTAVIUS CAESAR
Sovereign of Egypt, hail!
How much unlike art thou Mark Antony!
Yet, coming from him, that great medicine hath
With his tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my brave Mark Antony?
Last thing he did, dear queen,
He kissd,--the last of many doubled kisses,--
This orient pearl. His speech sticks in my heart.
Mine ear must pluck it thence.
Good friend, quoth he,
Say, the firm Roman to great Egypt sends
This treasure of an oyster; at whose foot,
To mend the petty present, I will piece
Her opulent throne with kingdoms; all the east,
Say thou, shall call her mistress. So he nodded,
And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed,
Who neighd so high, that what I would have spoke
Was beastly dumbd by him.
What, was he sad or merry?
Like to the time o the year between the extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merry.
O well-divided disposition! Note him,
Note him good Charmian, tis the man; but note him:
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their looks by his; he was not merry,
Which seemd to tell them his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his joy; but between both:
O heavenly mingle! Best thou sad or merry,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So does it no man else. Metst thou my posts?
Ay, madam, twenty several messengers:
Why do you send so thick?
Whos born that day
When I forget to send to Antony,
Shall die a beggar. Ink and paper, Charmian.
Welcome, my good Alexas. Did I, Charmian,
Ever love Caesar so?
O that brave Caesar!
Be choked with such another emphasis!
Say, the brave Antony.
The valiant Caesar!
By Isis, I will give thee bloody teeth,
If thou with Caesar paragon again
My man of men.
By your most gracious pardon,
I sing but after you.
My salad days,
When I was green in judgment: cold in blood,
To say as I said then! But, come, away;
Get me ink and paper:
He shall have every day a several greeting,
Or Ill unpeople Egypt.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Messina. POMPEYs house.
Enter POMPEY, MENECRATES, and MENAS, in warlike manner
If the great gods be just, they shall assist
The deeds of justest men.
Know, worthy Pompey,
That what they do delay, they not deny.
Whiles we are suitors to their throne, decays
The thing we sue for.
We, ignorant of ourselves,
Beg often our own harms, which the wise powers
Deny us for our good; so find we profit
By losing of our prayers.
I shall do well:
The people love me, and the sea is mine;
My powers are crescent, and my auguring hope
Says it will come to the full. Mark Antony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No wars without doors: Caesar gets money where
He loses hearts: Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flatterd; but he neither loves,
Nor either cares for him.
Caesar and Lepidus
Are in the field: a mighty strength they carry.
Where have you this? tis false.
From Silvius, sir.
He dreams: I know they are in Rome together,
Looking for Antony. But all the charms of love,
Salt Cleopatra, soften thy waned lip!
Let witchcraft join with beauty, lust with both!
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts,
Keep his brain fuming; Epicurean cooks
Sharpen with cloyless sauce his appetite;
That sleep and feeding may prorogue his honour
Even till a Lethed dulness!
Enter VARRIUS
How now, Varrius!
This is most certain that I shall deliver:
Mark Antony is every hour in Rome
Expected: since he went from Egypt tis
A space for further travel.
I could have given less matter
A better ear. Menas, I did not think
This amorous surfeiter would have donnd his helm
For such a petty war: his soldiership
Is twice the other twain: but let us rear
The higher our opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypts widow pluck
The neer-lust-wearied Antony.
I cannot hope
Caesar and Antony shall well greet together:
His wife thats dead did trespasses to Caesar;
His brother warrd upon him; although, I think,
Not moved by Antony.
I know not, Menas,
How lesser enmities may give way to greater.
Weret not that we stand up against them all,
Twere pregnant they should square between
themselves;
For they have entertained cause enough
To draw their swords: but how the fear of us
May cement their divisions and bind up
The petty difference, we yet not know.
Bet as our gods will havet! It only stands
Our lives upon to use our strongest hands.
Come, Menas.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Rome. The house of LEPIDUS.
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS and LEPIDUS
Good Enobarbus, tis a worthy deed,
And shall become you well, to entreat your captain
To soft and gentle speech.
I shall entreat him
To answer like himself: if Caesar move him,
Let Antony look over Caesars head
And speak as loud as Mars. By Jupiter,
Were I the wearer of Antonius beard,
I would not shavet to-day.
Tis not a time
For private stomaching.
Every time
Serves for the matter that is then born int.
But small to greater matters must give way.
Not if the small come first.
Your speech is passion:
But, pray you, stir no embers up. Here comes
The noble Antony.
Enter MARK ANTONY and VENTIDIUS
And yonder, Caesar.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MECAENAS, and AGRIPPA
If we compose well here, to Parthia:
Hark, Ventidius.
I do not know,
Mecaenas; ask Agrippa.
Noble friends,
That which combined us was most great, and let not
A leaner action rend us. Whats amiss,
May it be gently heard: when we debate
Our trivial difference loud, we do commit
Murder in healing wounds: then, noble partners,
The rather, for I earnestly beseech,
Touch you the sourest points with sweetest terms,
Nor curstness grow to the matter.
Tis spoken well.
Were we before our armies, and to fight.
I should do thus.
Flourish
Welcome to Rome.
Thank you.
Sit.
Sit, sir.
Nay, then.
I learn, you take things ill which are not so,
Or being, concern you not.
I must be laughd at,
If, or for nothing or a little, I
Should say myself offended, and with you
Chiefly i the world; more laughd at, that I should
Once name you derogately, when to sound your name
It not concernd me.
My being in Egypt, Caesar,
What wast to you?
No more than my residing here at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt: yet, if you there
Did practise on my state, your being in Egypt
Might be my question.
How intend you, practised?
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent
By what did here befal me. Your wife and brother
Made wars upon me; and their contestation
Was theme for you, you were the word of war.
You do mistake your business; my brother never
Did urge me in his act: I did inquire it;
And have my learning from some true reports,
That drew their swords with you. Did he not rather
Discredit my authority with yours;
And make the wars alike against my stomach,
Having alike your cause? Of this my letters
Before did satisfy you. If youll patch a quarrel,
As matter whole you have not to make it with,
It must not be with this.
You praise yourself
By laying defects of judgment to me; but
You patchd up your excuses.
Not so, not so;
I know you could not lack, I am certain ont,
Very necessity of this thought, that I,
Your partner in the cause gainst which he fought,
Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars
Which fronted mine own peace. As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit in such another:
The third o the world is yours; which with a snaffle
You may pace easy, but not such a wife.
Would we had all such wives, that the men might go
to wars with the women!
So much uncurbable, her garboils, Caesar
Made out of her impatience, which not wanted
Shrewdness of policy too, I grieving grant
Did you too much disquiet: for that you must
But say, I could not help it.
I wrote to you
When rioting in Alexandria; you
Did pocket up my letters, and with taunts
Did gibe my missive out of audience.
Sir,
He fell upon me ere admitted: then
Three kings I had newly feasted, and did want
Of what I was i the morning: but next day
I told him of myself; which was as much
As to have askd him pardon. Let this fellow
Be nothing of our strife; if we contend,
Out of our question wipe him.
You have broken
The article of your oath; which you shall never
Have tongue to charge me with.
Soft, Caesar!
No,
Lepidus, let him speak:
The honour is sacred which he talks on now,
Supposing that I lackd it. But, on, Caesar;
The article of my oath.
To lend me arms and aid when I required them;
The which you both denied.
Neglected, rather;
And then when poisond hours had bound me up
From mine own knowledge. As nearly as I may,
Ill play the penitent to you: but mine honesty
Shall not make poor my greatness, nor my power
Work without it. Truth is, that Fulvia,
To have me out of Egypt, made wars here;
For which myself, the ignorant motive, do
So far ask pardon as befits mine honour
To stoop in such a case.
Tis noble spoken.
If it might please you, to enforce no further
The griefs between ye: to forget them quite
Were to remember that the present need
Speaks to atone you.
Worthily spoken, Mecaenas.
Or, if you borrow one anothers love for the
instant, you may, when you hear no more words of
Pompey, return it again: you shall have time to
wrangle in when you have nothing else to do.
Thou art a soldier only: speak no more.
That truth should be silent I had almost forgot.
You wrong this presence; therefore speak no more.
Go to, then; your considerate stone.
I do not much dislike the matter, but
The manner of his speech; fort cannot be
We shall remain in friendship, our conditions
So differing in their acts. Yet if I knew
What hoop should hold us stanch, from edge to edge
O the world I would pursue it.
Give me leave, Caesar,--
Speak, Agrippa.
Thou hast a sister by the mothers side,
Admired Octavia: great Mark Antony
Is now a widower.
Say not so, Agrippa:
If Cleopatra heard you, your reproof
Were well deserved of rashness.
I am not married, Caesar: let me hear
Agrippa further speak.
To hold you in perpetual amity,
To make you brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an unslipping  knot, take Antony
Octavia to his wife; whose beauty claims
No worse a husband than the best of men;
Whose virtue and whose general graces speak
That which none else can utter. By this marriage,
All little jealousies, which now seem great,
And all great fears, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing: truths would be tales,
Where now half tales be truths: her love to both
Would, each to other and all loves to both,
Draw after her. Pardon what I have spoke;
For tis a studied, not a present thought,
By duty ruminated.
Will Caesar speak?
Not till he hears how Antony is touchd
With what is spoke already.
What power is in Agrippa,
If I would say, Agrippa, be it so,
To make this good?
The power of Caesar, and
His power unto Octavia.
May I never
To this good purpose, that so fairly shows,
Dream of impediment! Let me have thy hand:
Further this act of grace: and from this hour
The heart of brothers govern in our loves
And sway our great designs!
There is my hand.
A sister I bequeath you, whom no brother
Did ever love so dearly: let her live
To join our kingdoms and our hearts; and never
Fly off our loves again!
Happily, amen!
I did not think to draw my sword gainst Pompey;
For he hath laid strange courtesies and great
Of late upon me: I must thank him only,
Lest my remembrance suffer ill report;
At heel of that, defy him.
Time calls upons:
Of us must Pompey presently be sought,
Or else he seeks out us.
Where lies he?
About the mount Misenum.
What is his strength by land?
Great and increasing: but by sea
He is an absolute master.
So is the fame.
Would we had spoke together! Haste we for it:
Yet, ere we put ourselves in arms, dispatch we
The business we have talkd of.
With most gladness:
And do invite you to my sisters view,
Whither straight Ill lead you.
Let us, Lepidus,
Not lack your company.
Noble Antony,
Not sickness should detain me.
Flourish. Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK ANTONY, and LEPIDUS
Welcome from Egypt, sir.
Half the heart of Caesar, worthy Mecaenas! My
honourable friend, Agrippa!
Good Enobarbus!
We have cause to be glad that matters are so well
digested. You stayed well by t in Egypt.
Ay, sir; we did sleep day out of countenance, and
made the night light with drinking.
Eight wild-boars roasted whole at a breakfast, and
but twelve persons there; is this true?
This was but as a fly by an eagle: we had much more
monstrous matter of feast, which worthily deserved noting.
Shes a most triumphant lady, if report be square to
her.
When she first met Mark Antony, she pursed up
his heart, upon the river of Cydnus.
There she appeared indeed; or my reporter devised
well for her.
I will tell you.
The barge she sat in, like a burnishd throne,
Burnd on the water: the poop was beaten gold;
Purple the sails, and so perfumed that
The winds were love-sick with them; the oars were silver,
Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beat to follow faster,
As amorous of their strokes. For her own person,
It beggard all description: she did lie
In her pavilion--cloth-of-gold of tissue--
Oer-picturing that Venus where we see
The fancy outwork nature: on each side her
Stood pretty dimpled boys, like smiling Cupids,
With divers-colourd fans, whose wind did seem
To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool,
And what they undid did.
O, rare for Antony!
Her gentlewomen, like the Nereides,
So many mermaids, tended her i the eyes,
And made their bends adornings: at the helm
A seeming mermaid steers: the silken tackle
Swell with the touches of those flower-soft hands,
That yarely frame the office. From the barge
A strange invisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adjacent wharfs. The city cast
Her people out upon her; and Antony,
Enthroned i the market-place, did sit alone,
Whistling to the air; which, but for vacancy,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopatra too,
And made a gap in nature.
Rare Egyptian!
Upon her landing, Antony sent to her,
Invited her to supper: she replied,
It should be better he became her guest;
Which she entreated: our courteous Antony,
Whom neer the word of No woman heard speak,
Being barberd ten times oer, goes to the feast,
And for his ordinary pays his heart
For what his eyes eat only.
Royal wench!
She made great Caesar lay his sword to bed:
He ploughd her, and she croppd.
I saw her once
Hop forty paces through the public street;
And having lost her breath, she spoke, and panted,
That she did make defect perfection,
And, breathless, power breathe forth.
Now Antony must leave her utterly.
Never; he will not:
Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale
Her infinite variety: other women cloy
The appetites they feed: but she makes hungry
Where most she satisfies; for vilest things
Become themselves in her: that the holy priests
Bless her when she is riggish.
If beauty, wisdom, modesty, can settle
The heart of Antony, Octavia is
A blessed lottery to him.
Let us go.
Good Enobarbus, make yourself my guest
Whilst you abide here.
Humbly, sir, I thank you.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. OCTAVIUS CAESARs house.
Enter MARK ANTONY, OCTAVIUS CAESAR, OCTAVIA between them, and Attendants
The world and my great office will sometimes
Divide me from your bosom.
All which time
Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers
To them for you.
Good night, sir. My Octavia,
Read not my blemishes in the worlds report:
I have not kept my square; but that to come
Shall all be done by the rule. Good night, dear lady.
Good night, sir.
Good night.
Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR and OCTAVIA
Enter Soothsayer
Now, sirrah; you do wish yourself in Egypt?
Would I had never come from thence, nor you Thither!
If you can, your reason?
I see it in
My motion, have it not in my tongue: but yet
Hie you to Egypt again.
Say to me,
Whose fortunes shall rise higher, Caesars or mine?
Caesars.
Therefore, O Antony, stay not by his side:
Thy demon, thats thy spirit which keeps thee, is
Noble, courageous high, unmatchable,
Where Caesars is not; but, near him, thy angel
Becomes a fear, as being oerpowerd: therefore
Make space enough between you.
Speak this no more.
To none but thee; no more, but when to thee.
If thou dost play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to lose; and, of that natural luck,
He beats thee gainst the odds: thy lustre thickens,
When he shines by: I say again, thy spirit
Is all afraid to govern thee near him;
But, he away, tis noble.
Get thee gone:
Say to Ventidius I would speak with him:
Exit Soothsayer
He shall to Parthia. Be it art or hap,
He hath spoken true: the very dice obey him;
And in our sports my better cunning faints
Under his chance: if we draw lots, he speeds;
His cocks do win the battle still of mine,
When it is all to nought; and his quails ever
Beat mine, inhoopd, at odds. I will to Egypt:
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
I the east my pleasure lies.
Enter VENTIDIUS
O, come, Ventidius,
You must to Parthia: your commissions ready;
Follow me, and receivet.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The same. A street.
Enter LEPIDUS, MECAENAS, and AGRIPPA
Trouble yourselves no further: pray you, hasten
Your generals after.
Sir, Mark Antony
Will een but kiss Octavia, and well follow.
Till I shall see you in your soldiers dress,
Which will become you both, farewell.
We shall,
As I conceive the journey, be at the Mount
Before you, Lepidus.
Your way is shorter;
My purposes do draw me much about:
Youll win two days upon me.
Sir, good success!
Farewell.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Alexandria. CLEOPATRAs palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS
Give me some music; music, moody food
Of us that trade in love.
The music, ho!
Enter MARDIAN
Let it alone; lets to billiards: come, Charmian.
My arm is sore; best play with Mardian.
As well a woman with an eunuch playd
As with a woman. Come, youll play with me, sir?
As well as I can, madam.
And when good will is showd, thought come
too short,
The actor may plead pardon. Ill none now:
Give me mine angle; well to the river: there,
My music playing far off, I will betray
Tawny-finnd fishes; my bended hook shall pierce
Their slimy jaws; and, as I draw them up,
Ill think them every one an Antony,
And say Ah, ha! youre caught.
Twas merry when
You wagerd on your angling; when your diver
Did hang a salt-fish on his hook, which he
With fervency drew up.
That time,--O times!--
I laughd him out of patience; and that night
I laughd him into patience; and next morn,
Ere the ninth hour, I drunk him to his bed;
Then put my tires and mantles on him, whilst
I wore his sword Philippan.
Enter a Messenger
O, from Italy
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears,
That long time have been barren.
Madam, madam,--
Antonius dead!--If thou say so, villain,
Thou killst thy mistress: but well and free,
If thou so yield him, there is gold, and here
My bluest veins to kiss; a hand that kings
Have lippd, and trembled kissing.
First, madam, he is well.
Why, theres more gold.
But, sirrah, mark, we use
To say the dead are well: bring it to that,
The gold I give thee will I melt and pour
Down thy ill-uttering throat.
Good madam, hear me.
Well, go to, I will;
But theres no goodness in thy face: if Antony
Be free and healthful,--so tart a favour
To trumpet such good tidings! If not well,
Thou shouldst come like a Fury crownd with snakes,
Not like a formal man.
Willt please you hear me?
I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speakst:
Yet if thou say Antony lives, is well,
Or friends with Caesar, or not captive to him,
Ill set thee in a shower of gold, and hail
Rich pearls upon thee.
Madam, hes well.
Well said.
And friends with Caesar.
Thourt an honest man.
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever.
Make thee a fortune from me.
But yet, madam,--
I do not like But yet, it does allay
The good precedence; fie upon But yet!
But yet is as a gaoler to bring forth
Some monstrous malefactor. Prithee, friend,
Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear,
The good and bad together: hes friends with Caesar:
In state of health thou sayst; and thou sayst free.
Free, madam! no; I made no such report:
Hes bound unto Octavia.
For what good turn?
For the best turn i the bed.
I am pale, Charmian.
Madam, hes married to Octavia.
The most infectious pestilence upon thee!
Strikes him down
Good madam, patience.
What say you? Hence,
Strikes him again
Horrible villain! or Ill spurn thine eyes
Like balls before me; Ill unhair thy head:
She hales him up and down
Thou shalt be whippd with wire, and stewd in brine,
Smarting in lingering pickle.
Gracious madam,
I that do bring the news made not the match.
Say tis not so, a province I will give thee,
And make thy fortunes proud: the blow thou hadst
Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage;
And I will boot thee with what gift beside
Thy modesty can beg.
Hes married, madam.
Rogue, thou hast lived too long.
Draws a knife
Nay, then Ill run.
What mean you, madam? I have made no fault.
Exit
Good madam, keep yourself within yourself:
The man is innocent.
Some innocents scape not the thunderbolt.
Melt Egypt into Nile! and kindly creatures
Turn all to serpents! Call the slave again:
Though I am mad, I will not bite him: call.
He is afeard to come.
I will not hurt him.
Exit CHARMIAN
These hands do lack nobility, that they strike
A meaner than myself; since I myself
Have given myself the cause.
Re-enter CHARMIAN and Messenger
Come hither, sir.
Though it be honest, it is never good
To bring bad news: give to a gracious message.
An host of tongues; but let ill tidings tell
Themselves when they be felt.
I have done my duty.
Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser than I do,
If thou again say Yes.
Hes married, madam.
The gods confound thee! dost thou hold there still?
Should I lie, madam?
O, I would thou didst,
So half my Egypt were submerged and made
A cistern for scaled snakes! Go, get thee hence:
Hadst thou Narcissus in thy face, to me
Thou wouldst appear most ugly. He is married?
I crave your highness pardon.
He is married?
Take no offence that I would not offend you:
To punish me for what you make me do.
Seems much unequal: hes married to Octavia.
O, that his fault should make a knave of thee,
That art not what thourt sure of! Get thee hence:
The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome
Are all too dear for me: lie they upon thy hand,
And be undone by em!
Exit Messenger
Good your highness, patience.
In praising Antony, I have dispraised Caesar.
Many times, madam.
I am paid fort now.
Lead me from hence:
I faint: O Iras, Charmian! tis no matter.
Go to the fellow, good Alexas; bid him
Report the feature of Octavia, her years,
Her inclination, let him not leave out
The colour of her hair: bring me word quickly.
Exit ALEXAS
Let him for ever go:--let him not--Charmian,
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other ways a Mars. Bid you Alexas
To MARDIAN
Bring me word how tall she is. Pity me, Charmian,
But do not speak to me. Lead me to my chamber.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Near Misenum.
Flourish. Enter POMPEY and MENAS at one door,  with drum and trumpet: at another, OCTAVIUS CAESAR,  MARK ANTONY, LEPIDUS, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, MECAENAS, with Soldiers marching
Your hostages I have, so have you mine;
And we shall talk before we fight.
Most meet
That first we come to words; and therefore have we
Our written purposes before us sent;
Which, if thou hast considerd, let us know
If twill tie up thy discontented sword,
And carry back to Sicily much tall youth
That else must perish here.
To you all three,
The senators alone of this great world,
Chief factors for the gods, I do not know
Wherefore my father should revengers want,
Having a son and friends; since Julius Caesar,
Who at Philippi the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you labouring for him. What wast
That moved pale Cassius to conspire; and what
Made the all-honourd, honest Roman, Brutus,
With the armd rest, courtiers and beauteous freedom,
To drench the Capitol; but that they would
Have one man but a man? And that is it
Hath made me rig my navy; at whose burthen
The angerd ocean foams; with which I meant
To scourge the ingratitude that despiteful Rome
Cast on my noble father.
Take your time.
Thou canst not fear us, Pompey, with thy sails;
Well speak with thee at sea: at land, thou knowst
How much we do oer-count thee.
At land, indeed,
Thou dost oer-count me of my fathers house:
But, since the cuckoo builds not for himself,
Remain int as thou mayst.
Be pleased to tell us--
For this is from the present--how you take
The offers we have sent you.
Theres the point.
Which do not be entreated to, but weigh
What it is worth embraced.
And what may follow,
To try a larger fortune.
You have made me offer
Of Sicily, Sardinia; and I must
Rid all the sea of pirates; then, to send
Measures of wheat to Rome; this greed upon
To part with unhackd edges, and bear back
Our targes undinted.
Thats our offer.
Know, then,
I came before you here a man prepared
To take this offer: but Mark Antony
Put me to some impatience: though I lose
The praise of it by telling, you must know,
When Caesar and your brother were at blows,
Your mother came to Sicily and did find
Her welcome friendly.
I have heard it, Pompey;
And am well studied for a liberal thanks
Which I do owe you.
Let me have your hand:
I did not think, sir, to have met you here.
The beds i the east are soft; and thanks to you,
That calld me timelier than my purpose hither;
For I have gaind by t.
Since I saw you last,
There is a change upon you.
Well, I know not
What counts harsh fortune casts upon my face;
But in my bosom shall she never come,
To make my heart her vassal.
Well met here.
I hope so, Lepidus. Thus we are agreed:
I crave our composition may be written,
And seald between us.
Thats the next to do.
Well feast each other ere we part; and lets
Draw lots who shall begin.
That will I, Pompey.
No, Antony, take the lot: but, first
Or last, your fine Egyptian cookery
Shall have the fame. I have heard that Julius Caesar
Grew fat with feasting there.
You have heard much.
I have fair meanings, sir.
And fair words to them.
Then so much have I heard:
And I have heard, Apollodorus carried--
No more of that: he did so.
What, I pray you?
A certain queen to Caesar in a mattress.
I know thee now: how farest thou, soldier?
Well;
And well am like to do; for, I perceive,
Four feasts are toward.
Let me shake thy hand;
I never hated thee: I have seen thee fight,
When I have envied thy behavior.
Sir,
I never loved you much; but I ha praised ye,
When you have well deserved ten times as much
As I have said you did.
Enjoy thy plainness,
It nothing ill becomes thee.
Aboard my galley I invite you all:
Will you lead, lords?
Show us the way, sir.
Come.
Exeunt all but MENAS and ENOBARBUS
[Aside]  Thy father, Pompey, would neer have
made this treaty.--You and I have known, sir.
At sea, I think.
We have, sir.
You have done well by water.
And you by land.
I will praise any man that will praise me; though it
cannot be denied what I have done by land.
Nor what I have done by water.
Yes, something you can deny for your own
safety: you have been a great thief by sea.
And you by land.
There I deny my land service. But give me your
hand, Menas: if our eyes had authority, here they
might take two thieves kissing.
All mens faces are true, whatsomeer their hands are.
But there is never a fair woman has a true face.
No slander; they steal hearts.
We came hither to fight with you.
For my part, I am sorry it is turned to a drinking.
Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune.
If he do, sure, he cannot weept back again.
Youve said, sir. We looked not for Mark Antony
here: pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?
Caesars sister is called Octavia.
True, sir; she was the wife of Caius Marcellus.
But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius.
Pray ye, sir?
Tis true.
Then is Caesar and he for ever knit together.
If I were bound to divine of this unity, I would
not prophesy so.
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the
marriage than the love of the parties.
I think so too. But you shall find, the band that
seems to tie their friendship together will be the
very strangler of their amity: Octavia is of a
holy, cold, and still conversation.
Who would not have his wife so?
Not he that himself is not so; which is Mark Antony.
He will to his Egyptian dish again: then shall the
sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in Caesar; and, as
I said before, that which is the strength of their
amity shall prove the immediate author of their
variance. Antony will use his affection where it is:
he married but his occasion here.
And thus it may be. Come, sir, will you aboard?
I have a health for you.
I shall take it, sir: we have used our throats in Egypt.
Come, lets away.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. On board POMPEYs galley, off Misenum.
Music plays. Enter two or three Servants with a banquet
Here theyll be, man. Some o their plants are
ill-rooted already: the least wind i the world
will blow them down.
Lepidus is high-coloured.
They have made him drink alms-drink.
As they pinch one another by the disposition, he
cries out No more; reconciles them to his
entreaty, and himself to the drink.
But it raises the greater war between him and
his discretion.
Why, this is to have a name in great mens
fellowship: I had as lief have a reed that will do
me no service as a partisan I could not heave.
To be called into a huge sphere, and not to be seen
to move int, are the holes where eyes should be,
which pitifully disaster the cheeks.
A sennet sounded. Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK  ANTONY, LEPIDUS, POMPEY, AGRIPPA, MECAENAS, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, MENAS, with other captains
[To OCTAVIUS CAESAR]  Thus do they, sir: they take
the flow o the Nile
By certain scales i the pyramid; they know,
By the height, the lowness, or the mean, if dearth
Or foison follow: the higher Nilus swells,
The more it promises: as it ebbs, the seedsman
Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain,
And shortly comes to harvest.
Youve strange serpents there.
Ay, Lepidus.
Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the
operation of your sun: so is your crocodile.
They are so.
Sit,--and some wine! A health to Lepidus!
I am not so well as I should be, but Ill neer out.
Not till you have slept; I fear me youll be in till then.
Nay, certainly, I have heard the Ptolemies
pyramises are very goodly things; without
contradiction, I have heard that.
[Aside to POMPEY]  Pompey, a word.
[Aside to MENAS]                 Say in mine ear:
what ist?
[Aside to POMPEY]  Forsake thy seat, I do beseech
thee, captain,
And hear me speak a word.
[Aside to MENAS]  Forbear me till anon.
This wine for Lepidus!
What manner o thing is your crocodile?
It is shaped, sir, like itself; and it is as broad
as it hath breadth: it is just so high as it is,
and moves with its own organs: it lives by that
which nourisheth it; and the elements once out of
it, it transmigrates.
What colour is it of?
Of it own colour too.
Tis a strange serpent.
Tis so. And the tears of it are wet.
Will this description satisfy him?
With the health that Pompey gives him, else he is a
very epicure.
[Aside to MENAS]  Go hang, sir, hang! Tell me of
that? away!
