Do as I bid you. Wheres this cup I calld for?
[Aside to POMPEY]  If for the sake of merit thou
wilt hear me,
Rise from thy stool.
[Aside to MENAS]  I think thourt mad.
The matter?
Rises, and walks aside
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes.
Thou hast served me with much faith. Whats else to say?
Be jolly, lords.
These quick-sands, Lepidus,
Keep off them, for you sink.
Wilt thou be lord of all the world?
What sayst thou?
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world? Thats twice.
How should that be?
But entertain it,
And, though thou think me poor, I am the man
Will give thee all the world.
Hast thou drunk well?
Now, Pompey, I have kept me from the cup.
Thou art, if thou darest be, the earthly Jove:
Whateer the ocean pales, or sky inclips,
Is thine, if thou wilt hat.
Show me which way.
These three world-sharers, these competitors,
Are in thy vessel: let me cut the cable;
And, when we are put off, fall to their throats:
All there is thine.
Ah, this thou shouldst have done,
And not have spoke ont! In me tis villany;
In theet had been good service. Thou must know,
Tis not my profit that does lead mine honour;
Mine honour, it. Repent that eer thy tongue
Hath so betrayd thine act: being done unknown,
I should have found it afterwards well done;
But must condemn it now. Desist, and drink.
[Aside]  For this,
Ill never follow thy palld fortunes more.
Who seeks, and will not take when once tis offerd,
Shall never find it more.
This health to Lepidus!
Bear him ashore. Ill pledge it for him, Pompey.
Heres to thee, Menas!
Enobarbus, welcome!
Fill till the cup be hid.
Theres a strong fellow, Menas.
Pointing to the Attendant who carries off LEPIDUS
Why?
A bears the third part of the world, man; seest
not?
The third part, then, is drunk: would it were all,
That it might go on wheels!
Drink thou; increase the reels.
Come.
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast.
It ripens towards it. Strike the vessels, ho?
Here is to Caesar!
I could well forbeart.
Its monstrous labour, when I wash my brain,
And it grows fouler.
Be a child o the time.
Possess it, Ill make answer:
But I had rather fast from all four days
Than drink so much in one.
Ha, my brave emperor!
To MARK ANTONY
Shall we dance now the Egyptian Bacchanals,
And celebrate our drink?
Lets hat, good soldier.
Come, lets all take hands,
Till that the conquering wine hath steepd our sense
In soft and delicate Lethe.
All take hands.
Make battery to our ears with the loud music:
The while Ill place you: then the boy shall sing;
The holding every man shall bear as loud
As his strong sides can volley.
Music plays. DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS places them hand in hand
THE SONG.
Come, thou monarch of the vine,
Plumpy Bacchus with pink eyne!
In thy fats our cares be drownd,
With thy grapes our hairs be crownd:
Cup us, till the world go round,
Cup us, till the world go round!
What would you more? Pompey, good night. Good brother,
Let me request you off: our graver business
Frowns at this levity. Gentle lords, lets part;
You see we have burnt our cheeks: strong Enobarb
Is weaker than the wine; and mine own tongue
Splits what it speaks: the wild disguise hath almost
Antickd us all. What needs more words? Good night.
Good Antony, your hand.
Ill try you on the shore.
And shall, sir; gives your hand.
O Antony,
You have my fathers house,--But, what? we are friends.
Come, down into the boat.
Take heed you fall not.
Exeunt all but DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS and MENAS
Menas, Ill not on shore.
No, to my cabin.
These drums! these trumpets, flutes! what!
Let Neptune hear we bid a loud farewell
To these great fellows: sound and be hangd, sound out!
Sound a flourish, with drums
Ho! says a Theres my cap.
Ho! Noble captain, come.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. A plain in Syria.
Enter VENTIDIUS as it were in triumph, with SILIUS,  and other Romans, Officers, and Soldiers; the dead body of PACORUS borne before him
Now, darting Parthia, art thou struck; and now
Pleased fortune does of Marcus Crassus death
Make me revenger. Bear the kings sons body
Before our army. Thy Pacorus, Orodes,
Pays this for Marcus Crassus.
Noble Ventidius,
Whilst yet with Parthian blood thy sword is warm,
The fugitive Parthians follow; spur through Media,
Mesopotamia, and the shelters whither
The routed fly: so thy grand captain Antony
Shall set thee on triumphant chariots and
Put garlands on thy head.
O Silius, Silius,
I have done enough; a lower place, note well,
May make too great an act: for learn this, Silius;
Better to leave undone, than by our deed
Acquire too high a fame when him we serves away.
Caesar and Antony have ever won
More in their officer than person: Sossius,
One of my place in Syria, his lieutenant,
For quick accumulation of renown,
Which he achieved by the minute, lost his favour.
Who does i the wars more than his captain can
Becomes his captains captain: and ambition,
The soldiers virtue, rather makes choice of loss,
Than gain which darkens him.
I could do more to do Antonius good,
But twould offend him; and in his offence
Should my performance perish.
Thou hast, Ventidius,
that
Without the which a soldier, and his sword,
Grants scarce distinction. Thou wilt write to Antony!
Ill humbly signify what in his name,
That magical word of war, we have effected;
How, with his banners and his well-paid ranks,
The neer-yet-beaten horse of Parthia
We have jaded out o the field.
Where is he now?
He purposeth to Athens: whither, with what haste
The weight we must convey withs will permit,
We shall appear before him. On there; pass along!
Exeunt
SCENE II. Rome. An ante-chamber in OCTAVIUS CAESARs house.
Enter AGRIPPA at one door, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS at another
What, are the brothers parted?
They have dispatchd with Pompey, he is gone;
The other three are sealing. Octavia weeps
To part from Rome; Caesar is sad; and Lepidus,
Since Pompeys feast, as Menas says, is troubled
With the green sickness.
Tis a noble Lepidus.
A very fine one: O, how he loves Caesar!
Nay, but how dearly he adores Mark Antony!
Caesar? Why, hes the Jupiter of men.
Whats Antony? The god of Jupiter.
Spake you of Caesar? How! the non-pareil!
O Antony! O thou Arabian bird!
Would you praise Caesar, say Caesar: go no further.
Indeed, he plied them both with excellent praises.
But he loves Caesar best; yet he loves Antony:
Ho! hearts, tongues, figures, scribes, bards,
poets, cannot
Think, speak, cast, write, sing, number, ho!
His love to Antony. But as for Caesar,
Kneel down, kneel down, and wonder.
Both he loves.
They are his shards, and he their beetle.
Trumpets within
So;
This is to horse. Adieu, noble Agrippa.
Good fortune, worthy soldier; and farewell.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, MARK ANTONY, LEPIDUS, and OCTAVIA
No further, sir.
You take from me a great part of myself;
Use me well in t. Sister, prove such a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest band
Shall pass on thy approof. Most noble Antony,
Let not the piece of virtue, which is set
Betwixt us as the cement of our love,
To keep it builded, be the ram to batter
The fortress of it; for better might we
Have loved without this mean, if on both parts
This be not cherishd.
Make me not offended
In your distrust.
I have said.
You shall not find,
Though you be therein curious, the least cause
For what you seem to fear: so, the gods keep you,
And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends!
We will here part.
Farewell, my dearest sister, fare thee well:
The elements be kind to thee, and make
Thy spirits all of comfort! fare thee well.
My noble brother!
The April s in her eyes: it is loves spring,
And these the showers to bring it on. Be cheerful.
Sir, look well to my husbands house; and--
What, Octavia?
Ill tell you in your ear.
Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her heart inform her tongue,--the swans
down-feather,
That stands upon the swell at full of tide,
And neither way inclines.
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  Will Caesar weep?
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  He has a cloud in s face.
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  He were the worse for that,
were he a horse;
So is he, being a man.
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  Why, Enobarbus,
When Antony found Julius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring; and he wept
When at Philippi he found Brutus slain.
[Aside to AGRIPPA]  That year, indeed, he was
troubled with a rheum;
What willingly he did confound he waild,
Believet, till I wept too.
No, sweet Octavia,
You shall hear from me still; the time shall not
Out-go my thinking on you.
Come, sir, come;
Ill wrestle with you in my strength of love:
Look, here I have you; thus I let you go,
And give you to the gods.
Adieu; be happy!
Let all the number of the stars give light
To thy fair way!
Farewell, fa rewell!
Kisses OCTAVIA
Farewell!
Trumpets sound. Exeunt
SCENE III. Alexandria. CLEOPATRAs palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and ALEXAS
Where is the fellow?
Half afeard to come.
Go to, go to.
Enter the Messenger as before
Come hither, sir.
Good majesty,
Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you
But when you are well pleased.
That Herods head
Ill have: but how, when Antony is gone
Through whom I might command it? Come thou near.
Most gracious majesty,--
Didst thou behold Octavia?
Ay, dread queen.
Where?
Madam, in Rome;
I lookd her in the face, and saw her led
Between her brother and Mark Antony.
Is she as tall as me?
She is not, madam.
Didst hear her speak? is she shrill-tongued or low?
Madam, I heard her speak; she is low-voiced.
Thats not so good: he cannot like her long.
Like her! O Isis! tis impossible.
I think so, Charmian: dull of tongue, and dwarfish!
What majesty is in her gait? Remember,
If eer thou lookdst on majesty.
She creeps:
Her motion and her station are as one;
She shows a body rather than a life,
A statue than a breather.
Is this certain?
Or I have no observance.
Three in Egypt
Cannot make better note.
Hes very knowing;
I do perceivet: theres nothing in her yet:
The fellow has good judgment.
Excellent.
Guess at her years, I prithee.
Madam,
She was a widow,--
Widow! Charmian, hark.
And I do think shes thirty.
Bearst thou her face in mind? ist long or round?
Round even to faultiness.
For the most part, too, they are foolish that are so.
Her hair, what colour?
Brown, madam: and her forehead
As low as she would wish it.
Theres gold for thee.
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill:
I will employ thee back again; I find thee
Most fit for business: go make thee ready;
Our letters are prepared.
Exit Messenger
A proper man.
Indeed, he is so: I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why, methinks, by him,
This creatures no such thing.
Nothing, madam.
The man hath seen some majesty, and should know.
Hath he seen majesty? Isis else defend,
And serving you so long!
I have one thing more to ask him yet, good Charmian:
But tis no matter; thou shalt bring him to me
Where I will write. All may be well enough.
I warrant you, madam.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Athens. A room in MARK ANTONYs house.
Enter MARK ANTONY and OCTAVIA
Nay, nay, Octavia, not only that,--
That were excusable, that, and thousands more
Of semblable import,--but he hath waged
New wars gainst Pompey; made his will, and read it
To public ear:
Spoke scantly of me: when perforce he could not
But pay me terms of honour, cold and sickly
He vented them; most narrow measure lent me:
When the best hint was given him, he not tookt,
Or did it from his teeth.
O my good lord,
Believe not all; or, if you must believe,
Stomach not all. A more unhappy lady,
If this division chance, neer stood between,
Praying for both parts:
The good gods me presently,
When I shall pray, O bless my lord and husband!
Undo that prayer, by crying out as loud,
O, bless my brother! Husband win, win brother,
Prays, and destroys the prayer; no midway
Twixt these extremes at all.
Gentle Octavia,
Let your best love draw to that point, which seeks
Best to preserve it: if I lose mine honour,
I lose myself: better I were not yours
Than yours so branchless. But, as you requested,
Yourself shall go between s: the mean time, lady,
Ill raise the preparation of a war
Shall stain your brother: make your soonest haste;
So your desires are yours.
Thanks to my lord.
The Jove of power make me most weak, most weak,
Your reconciler! Wars twixt you twain would be
As if the world should cleave, and that slain men
Should solder up the rift.
When it appears to you where this begins,
Turn your displeasure that way: for our faults
Can never be so equal, that your love
Can equally move with them. Provide your going;
Choose your own company, and command what cost
Your heart has mind to.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The same. Another room.
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS and EROS, meeting
How now, friend Eros!
Theres strange news come, sir.
What, man?
Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey.
This is old: what is the success?
Caesar, having made use of him in the wars gainst
Pompey, presently denied him rivality; would not let
him partake in the glory of the action: and not
resting here, accuses him of letters he had formerly
wrote to Pompey; upon his own appeal, seizes him: so
the poor third is up, till death enlarge his confine.
Then, world, thou hast a pair of chaps, no more;
And throw between them all the food thou hast,
Theyll grind the one the other. Wheres Antony?
Hes walking in the garden--thus; and spurns
The rush that lies before him; cries, Fool Lepidus!
And threats the throat of that his officer
That murderd Pompey.
Our great navys riggd.
For Italy and Caesar. More, Domitius;
My lord desires you presently: my news
I might have told hereafter.
Twill be naught:
But let it be. Bring me to Antony.
Come, sir.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Rome. OCTAVIUS CAESARs house.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MECAENAS
Contemning Rome, he has done all this, and more,
In Alexandria: heres the manner of t:
I the market-place, on a tribunal silverd,
Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold
Were publicly enthroned: at the feet sat
Caesarion, whom they call my fathers son,
And all the unlawful issue that their lust
Since then hath made between them. Unto her
He gave the stablishment of Egypt; made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia,
Absolute queen.
This in the public eye?
I the common show-place, where they exercise.
His sons he there proclaimd the kings of kings:
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia.
He gave to Alexander; to Ptolemy he assignd
Syria, Cilicia, and Phoenicia: she
In the habiliments of the goddess Isis
That day appeard; and oft before gave audience,
As tis reported, so.
Let Rome be thus Informd.
Who, queasy with his insolence
Already, will their good thoughts call from him.
The people know it; and have now received
His accusations.
Who does he accuse?
Caesar: and that, having in Sicily
Sextus Pompeius spoild, we had not rated him
His part o the isle: then does he say, he lent me
Some shipping unrestored: lastly, he frets
That Lepidus of the triumvirate
Should be deposed; and, being, that we detain
All his revenue.
Sir, this should be answerd.
Tis done already, and the messenger gone.
I have told him, Lepidus was grown too cruel;
That he his high authority abused,
And did deserve his change: for what I have conquerd,
I grant him part; but then, in his Armenia,
And other of his conquerd kingdoms, I
Demand the like.
Hell never yield to that.
Nor must not then be yielded to in this.
Enter OCTAVIA with her train
Hail, Caesar, and my lord! hail, most dear Caesar!
That ever I should call thee castaway!
You have not calld me so, nor have you cause.
Why have you stoln upon us thus! You come not
Like Caesars sister: the wife of Antony
Should have an army for an usher, and
The neighs of horse to tell of her approach
Long ere she did appear; the trees by the way
Should have borne men; and expectation fainted,
Longing for what it had not; nay, the dust
Should have ascended to the roof of heaven,
Raised by your populous troops: but you are come
A market-maid to Rome; and have prevented
The ostentation of our love, which, left unshown,
Is often left unloved; we should have met you
By sea and land; supplying every stage
With an augmented greeting.
Good my lord,
To come thus was I not constraind, but did
On my free will. My lord, Mark Antony,
Hearing that you prepared for war, acquainted
My grieved ear withal; whereon, I beggd
His pardon for return.
Which soon he granted,
Being an obstruct tween his lust and him.
Do not say so, my lord.
I have eyes upon him,
And his affairs come to me on the wind.
Where is he now?
My lord, in Athens.
No, my most wronged sister; Cleopatra
Hath nodded him to her. He hath given his empire
Up to a whore; who now are levying
The kings o the earth for war; he hath assembled
Bocchus, the king of Libya; Archelaus,
Of Cappadocia; Philadelphos, king
Of Paphlagonia; the Thracian king, Adallas;
King Malchus of Arabia; King of Pont;
Herod of Jewry; Mithridates, king
Of Comagene; Polemon and Amyntas,
The kings of Mede and Lycaonia,
With a more larger list of sceptres.
Ay me, most wretched,
That have my heart parted betwixt two friends
That do afflict each other!
Welcome hither:
Your letters did withhold our breaking forth;
Till we perceived, both how you were wrong led,
And we in negligent danger. Cheer your heart;
Be you not troubled with the time, which drives
Oer your content these strong necessities;
But let determined things to destiny
Hold unbewaild their way. Welcome to Rome;
Nothing more dear to me. You are abused
Beyond the mark of thought: and the high gods,
To do you justice, make them ministers
Of us and those that love you. Best of comfort;
And ever welcome to us.
Welcome, lady.
Welcome, dear madam.
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you:
Only the adulterous Antony, most large
In his abominations, turns you off;
And gives his potent regiment to a trull,
That noises it against us.
Is it so, sir?
Most certain. Sister, welcome: pray you,
Be ever known to patience: my dearst sister!
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Near Actium. MARK ANTONYs camp.
Enter CLEOPATRA and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
I will be even with thee, doubt it not.
But why, why, why?
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars,
And sayst it is not fit.
Well, is it, is it?
If not denounced against us, why should not we
Be there in person?
[Aside]  Well, I could reply:
If we should serve with horse and mares together,
The horse were merely lost; the mares would bear
A soldier and his horse.
What ist you say?
Your presence needs must puzzle Antony;
Take from his heart, take from his brain,
froms time,
What should not then be spared. He is already
Traduced for levity; and tis said in Rome
That Photinus an eunuch and your maids
Manage this war.
Sink Rome, and their tongues rot
That speak against us! A charge we bear i the war,
And, as the president of my kingdom, will
Appear there for a man. Speak not against it:
I will not stay behind.
Nay, I have done.
Here comes the emperor.
Enter MARK ANTONY and CANIDIUS
Is it not strange, Canidius,
That from Tarentum and Brundusium
He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea,
And take in Toryne? You have heard ont, sweet?
Celerity is never more admired
Than by the negligent.
A good rebuke,
Which might have well becomed the best of men,
To taunt at slackness. Canidius, we
Will fight with him by sea.
By sea! what else?
Why will my lord do so?
For that he dares us tot.
So hath my lord dared him to single fight.
Ay, and to wage this battle at Pharsalia.
Where Caesar fought with Pompey: but these offers,
Which serve not for his vantage, be shakes off;
And so should you.
Your ships are not well mannd;
Your mariners are muleters, reapers, people
Ingrossd by swift impress; in Caesars fleet
Are those that often have gainst Pompey fought:
Their ships are yare; yours, heavy: no disgrace
Shall fall you for refusing him at sea,
Being prepared for land.
By sea, by sea.
Most worthy sir, you therein throw away
The absolute soldiership you have by land;
Distract your army, which doth most consist
Of war-markd footmen; leave unexecuted
Your own renowned knowledge; quite forego
The way which promises assurance; and
Give up yourself merely to chance and hazard,
From firm security.
Ill fight at sea.
I have sixty sails, Caesar none better.
Our overplus of shipping will we burn;
And, with the rest full-mannd, from the head of Actium
Beat the approaching Caesar. But if we fail,
We then can dot at land.
Enter a Messenger
Thy business?
The news is true, my lord; he is descried;
Caesar has taken Toryne.
Can he be there in person? tis impossible;
Strange that power should be. Canidius,
Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land,
And our twelve thousand horse. Well to our ship:
Away, my Thetis!
Enter a Soldier
How now, worthy soldier?
O noble emperor, do not fight by sea;
Trust not to rotten planks: do you misdoubt
This sword and these my wounds? Let the Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a-ducking; we
Have used to conquer, standing on the earth,
And fighting foot to foot.
Well, well: away!
Exeunt MARK ANTONY, QUEEN CLEOPATRA, and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
By Hercules, I think I am i the right.
Soldier, thou art: but his whole action grows
Not in the power ont: so our leaders led,
And we are womens men.
You keep by land
The legions and the horse whole, do you not?
Marcus Octavius, Marcus Justeius,
Publicola, and Caelius, are for sea:
But we keep whole by land. This speed of Caesars
Carries beyond belief.
While he was yet in Rome,
His power went out in such distractions as
Beguiled all spies.
Whos his lieutenant, hear you?
They say, one Taurus.
Well I know the man.
Enter a Messenger
The emperor calls Canidius.
With news the times with labour, and throes forth,
Each minute, some.
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. A plain near Actium.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, and TAURUS, with his army, marching
Taurus!
My lord?
Strike not by land; keep whole: provoke not battle,
Till we have done at sea. Do not exceed
The prescript of this scroll: our fortune lies
Upon this jump.
Exeunt
SCENE IX. Another part of the plain.
Enter MARK ANTONY and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Set we our squadrons on yond side o the hill,
In eye of Caesars battle; from which place
We may the number of the ships behold,
And so proceed accordingly.
Exeunt
SCENE X. Another part of the plain.
CANIDIUS marcheth with his land army one way over  the stage; and TAURUS, the lieutenant of OCTAVIUS  CAESAR, the other way. After their going in, is heard the noise of a sea-fight
Alarum. Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Naught, naught all, naught! I can behold no longer:
The Antoniad, the Egyptian admiral,
With all their sixty, fly and turn the rudder:
To seet mine eyes are blasted.
Enter SCARUS
Gods and goddesses,
All the whole synod of them!
Whats thy passion!
The greater cantle of the world is lost
With very ignorance; we have kissd away
Kingdoms and provinces.
How appears the fight?
On our side like the tokend pestilence,
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt,--
Whom leprosy oertake!--i the midst o the fight,
When vantage like a pair of twins appeard,
Both as the same, or rather ours the elder,
The breese upon her, like a cow in June,
Hoists sails and flies.
That I beheld:
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight, and could not
Endure a further view.
She once being loofd,
The noble ruin of her magic, Antony,
Claps on his sea-wing, and, like a doting mallard,
Leaving the fight in height, flies after her:
I never saw an action of such shame;
Experience, manhood, honour, neer before
Did violate so itself.
Alack, alack!
Enter CANIDIUS
Our fortune on the sea is out of breath,
And sinks most lamentably. Had our general
Been what he knew himself, it had gone well:
O, he has given example for our flight,
Most grossly, by his own!
Ay, are you thereabouts?
Why, then, good night indeed.
Toward Peloponnesus are they fled.
Tis easy tot; and there I will attend
What further comes.
To Caesar will I render
My legions and my horse: six kings already
Show me the way of yielding.
Ill yet follow
The wounded chance of Antony, though my reason
Sits in the wind against me.
Exeunt
SCENE XI. Alexandria. CLEOPATRAs palace.
Enter MARK ANTONY with Attendants
Hark! the land bids me tread no more upont;
It is ashamed to bear me! Friends, come hither:
I am so lated in the world, that I
Have lost my way for ever: I have a ship
Laden with gold; take that, divide it; fly,
And make your peace with Caesar.
Fly! not we.
I have fled myself; and have instructed cowards
To run and show their shoulders. Friends, be gone;
I have myself resolved upon a course
Which has no need of you; be gone:
My treasures in the harbour, take it. O,
I followd that I blush to look upon:
My very hairs do mutiny; for the white
Reprove the brown for rashness, and they them
For fear and doting. Friends, be gone: you shall
Have letters from me to some friends that will
Sweep your way for you. Pray you, look not sad,
Nor make replies of loathness: take the hint
Which my despair proclaims; let that be left
Which leaves itself: to the sea-side straightway:
I will possess you of that ship and treasure.
Leave me, I pray, a little: pray you now:
Nay, do so; for, indeed, I have lost command,
Therefore I pray you: Ill see you by and by.
Sits down
Enter CLEOPATRA led by CHARMIAN and IRAS; EROS following
Nay, gentle madam, to him, comfort him.
Do, most dear queen.
Do! why: what else?
Let me sit down. O Juno!
No, no, no, no, no.
See you here, sir?
O fie, fie, fie!
Madam!
Madam, O good empress!
Sir, sir,--
Yes, my lord, yes; he at Philippi kept
His sword een like a dancer; while I struck
The lean and wrinkled Cassius; and twas I
That the mad Brutus ended: he alone
Dealt on lieutenantry, and no practise had
In the brave squares of war: yet now--No matter.
Ah, stand by.
The queen, my lord, the queen.
Go to him, madam, speak to him:
He is unqualitied with very shame.
Well then, sustain him: O!
Most noble sir, arise; the queen approaches:
Her heads declined, and death will seize her, but
Your comfort makes the rescue.
I have offended reputation,
A most unnoble swerving.
Sir, the queen.
O, whither hast thou led me, Egypt? See,
How I convey my shame out of thine eyes
By looking back what I have left behind
Stroyd in dishonour.
O my lord, my lord,
Forgive my fearful sails! I little thought
You would have followd.
Egypt, thou knewst too well
My heart was to thy rudder tied by the strings,
And thou shouldst tow me after: oer my spirit
Thy full supremacy thou knewst, and that
Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods
Command me.
O, my pardon!
Now I must
To the young man send humble treaties, dodge
And palter in the shifts of lowness; who
With half the bulk o the world playd as I pleased,
Making and marring fortunes. You did know
How much you were my conqueror; and that
My sword, made weak by my affection, would
Obey it on all cause.
Pardon, pardon!
Fall not a tear, I say; one of them rates
All that is won and lost: give me a kiss;
Even this repays me. We sent our schoolmaster;
Is he come back? Love, I am full of lead.
Some wine, within there, and our viands! Fortune knows
We scorn her most when most she offers blows.
Exeunt
SCENE XII. Egypt. OCTAVIUS CAESARs camp.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, DOLABELLA, THYREUS, with others
Let him appear thats come from Antony.
Know you him?
Caesar, tis his schoolmaster:
An argument that he is pluckd, when hither
He sends so poor a pinion off his wing,
Which had superfluous kings for messengers
Not many moons gone by.
Enter EUPHRONIUS, ambassador from MARK ANTONY
Approach, and speak.
Such as I am, I come from Antony:
I was of late as petty to his ends
As is the morn-dew on the myrtle-leaf
To his grand sea.
Bet so: declare thine office.
Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee, and
Requires to live in Egypt: which not granted,
He lessens his requests; and to thee sues
To let him breathe between the heavens and earth,
A private man in Athens: this for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confess thy greatness;
Submits her to thy might; and of thee craves
The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs,
Now hazarded to thy grace.
For Antony,
I have no ears to his request. The queen
Of audience nor desire shall fail, so she
From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend,
Or take his life there: this if she perform,
She shall not sue unheard. So to them both.
Fortune pursue thee!
Bring him through the bands.
Exit EUPHRONIUS
To THYREUS
From Antony win Cleopatra: promise,
And in our name, what she requires; add more,
From thine invention, offers: women are not
In their best fortunes strong; but want will perjure
The neer touchd vestal: try thy cunning, Thyreus;
Make thine own edict for thy pains, which we
Will answer as a law.
Caesar, I go.
Observe how Antony becomes his flaw,
And what thou thinkst his very action speaks
In every power that moves.
Caesar, I shall.
Exeunt
SCENE XIII. Alexandria. CLEOPATRAs palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, and IRAS
What shall we do, Enobarbus?
Think, and die.
Is Antony or we in fault for this?
Antony only, that would make his will
Lord of his reason. What though you fled
From that great face of war, whose several ranges
Frighted each other? why should he follow?
The itch of his affection should not then
Have nickd his captainship; at such a point,
When half to half the world opposed, he being
The meered question: twas a shame no less
Than was his loss, to course your flying flags,
And leave his navy gazing.
Prithee, peace.
Enter MARK ANTONY with EUPHRONIUS, the Ambassador
Is that his answer?
Ay, my lord.
The queen shall then have courtesy, so she
Will yield us up.
He says so.
Let her knowt.
To the boy Caesar send this grizzled head,
And he will fill thy wishes to the brim
With principalities.
That head, my lord?
To him again: tell him he wears the rose
Of youth upon him; from which the world should note
Something particular: his coin, ships, legions,
May be a cowards; whose ministers would prevail
Under the service of a child as soon
As i the command of Caesar: I dare him therefore
To lay his gay comparisons apart,
And answer me declined, sword against sword,
Ourselves alone. Ill write it: follow me.
Exeunt MARK ANTONY and EUPHRONIUS
[Aside]  Yes, like enough, high-battled Caesar will
Unstate his happiness, and be staged to the show,
Against a sworder! I see mens judgments are
A parcel of their fortunes; and things outward
Do draw the inward quality after them,
To suffer all alike. That he should dream,
Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
Answer his emptiness! Caesar, thou hast subdued
His judgment too.
Enter an Attendant
A messenger from CAESAR.
What, no more ceremony? See, my women!
Against the blown rose may they stop their nose
That kneeld unto the buds. Admit him, sir.
Exit Attendant
[Aside]  Mine honesty and I begin to square.
The loyalty well held to fools does make
Our faith mere folly: yet he that can endure
To follow with allegiance a falln lord
Does conquer him that did his master conquer
And earns a place i the story.
Enter THYREUS
Caesars will?
Hear it apart.
None but friends: say boldly.
So, haply, are they friends to Antony.
He needs as many, sir, as Caesar has;
Or needs not us. If Caesar please, our master
Will leap to be his friend: for us, you know,
Whose he is we are, and that is, Caesars.
So.
Thus then, thou most renownd: Caesar entreats,
Not to consider in what case thou standst,
Further than he is Caesar.
Go on: right royal.
He knows that you embrace not Antony
As you did love, but as you feard him.
O!
The scars upon your honour, therefore, he
Does pity, as constrained blemishes,
Not as deserved.
He is a god, and knows
What is most right: mine honour was not yielded,
But conquerd merely.
[Aside]             To be sure of that,
I will ask Antony. Sir, sir, thou art so leaky,
That we must leave thee to thy sinking, for
Thy dearest quit thee.
Exit
Shall I say to Caesar
What you require of him? for he partly begs
To be desired to give. It much would please him,
That of his fortunes you should make a staff
To lean upon: but it would warm his spirits,
To hear from me you had left Antony,
And put yourself under his shrowd,
The universal landlord.
Whats your name?
My name is Thyreus.
Most kind messenger,
Say to great Caesar this: in deputation
I kiss his conquering hand: tell him, I am prompt
To lay my crown at s feet, and there to kneel:
Tell him from his all-obeying breath I hear
The doom of Egypt.
Tis your noblest course.
Wisdom and fortune combating together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may shake it. Give me grace to lay
My duty on your hand.
Your Caesars father oft,
When he hath mused of taking kingdoms in,
Bestowd his lips on that unworthy place,
As it raind kisses.
Re-enter MARK ANTONY and DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Favours, by Jove that thunders!
What art thou, fellow?
One that but performs
The bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest
To have command obeyd.
[Aside]               You will be whippd.
Approach, there! Ah, you kite! Now, gods
and devils!
Authority melts from me: of late, when I cried Ho!
Like boys unto a muss, kings would start forth,
And cry Your will? Have you no ears? I am
Antony yet.
Enter Attendants
Take hence this Jack, and whip him.
[Aside]  Tis better playing with a lions whelp
Than with an old one dying.
Moon and stars!
Whip him. Weret twenty of the greatest tributaries
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I find them
So saucy with the hand of she here,--whats her name,
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him, fellows,
Till, like a boy, you see him cringe his face,
And whine aloud for mercy: take him hence.
Mark Antony!
Tug him away: being whippd,
Bring him again: this Jack of Caesars shall
Bear us an errand to him.
Exeunt Attendants with THYREUS
You were half blasted ere I knew you: ha!
Have I my pillow left unpressd in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawful race,
And by a gem of women, to be abused
By one that looks on feeders?
Good my lord,--
You have been a boggler ever:
But when we in our viciousness grow hard--
O misery ont!--the wise gods seel our eyes;
In our own filth drop our clear judgments; make us
Adore our errors; laugh ats, while we strut
To our confusion.
O, ist come to this?
I found you as a morsel cold upon
Dead Caesars trencher; nay, you were a fragment
Of Cneius Pompeys; besides what hotter hours,
Unregisterd in vulgar fame, you have
Luxuriously pickd out: for, I am sure,
Though you can guess what temperance should be,
You know not what it is.
Wherefore is this?
To let a fellow that will take rewards
And say God quit you! be familiar with
My playfellow, your hand; this kingly seal
And plighter of high hearts! O, that I were
Upon the hill of Basan, to outroar
The horned herd! for I have savage cause;
And to proclaim it civilly, were like
A halterd neck which does the hangman thank
For being yare about him.
Re-enter Attendants with THYREUS
Is he whippd?
Soundly, my lord.
Cried he? and beggd a pardon?
He did ask favour.
If that thy father live, let him repent
Thou wast not made his daughter; and be thou sorry
To follow Caesar in his triumph, since
Thou hast been whippd for following him: henceforth
The white hand of a lady fever thee,
Shake thou to look on t. Get thee back to Caesar,
Tell him thy entertainment: look, thou say
He makes me angry with him; for he seems
Proud and disdainful, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was: he makes me angry;
And at this time most easy tis to dot,
