When my good stars, that were my former guides,
Have empty left their orbs, and shot their fires
Into the abysm of hell. If he mislike
My speech and what is done, tell him he has
Hipparchus, my enfranched bondman, whom
He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he shall like, to quit me: urge it thou:
Hence with thy stripes, begone!
Exit THYREUS
Have you done yet?
Alack, our terrene moon
Is now eclipsed; and it portends alone
The fall of Antony!
I must stay his time.
To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
With one that ties his points?
Not know me yet?
Cold-hearted toward me?
Ah, dear, if I be so,
From my cold heart let heaven engender hail,
And poison it in the source; and the first stone
Drop in my neck: as it determines, so
Dissolve my life! The next Caesarion smite!
Till by degrees the memory of my womb,
Together with my brave Egyptians all,
By the discandying of this pelleted storm,
Lie graveless, till the flies and gnats of Nile
Have buried them for prey!
I am satisfied.
Caesar sits down in Alexandria; where
I will oppose his fate. Our force by land
Hath nobly held; our severd navy too
Have knit again, and fleet, threatening most sea-like.
Where hast thou been, my heart? Dost thou hear, lady?
If from the field I shall return once more
To kiss these lips, I will appear in blood;
I and my sword will earn our chronicle:
Theres hope int yet.
Thats my brave lord!
I will be treble-sinewd, hearted, breathed,
And fight maliciously: for when mine hours
Were nice and lucky, men did ransom lives
Of me for jests; but now Ill set my teeth,
And send to darkness all that stop me. Come,
Lets have one other gaudy night: call to me
All my sad captains; fill our bowls once more;
Lets mock the midnight bell.
It is my birth-day:
I had thought to have held it poor: but, since my lord
Is Antony again, I will be Cleopatra.
We will yet do well.
Call all his noble captains to my lord.
Do so, well speak to them; and to-night Ill force
The wine peep through their scars. Come on, my queen;
Theres sap int yet. The next time I do fight,
Ill make death love me; for I will contend
Even with his pestilent scythe.
Exeunt all but DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Now hell outstare the lightning. To be furious,
Is to be frighted out of fear; and in that mood
The dove will peck the estridge; and I see still,
A diminution in our captains brain
Restores his heart: when valour preys on reason,
It eats the sword it fights with. I will seek
Some way to leave him.
Exit
ACT IV
SCENE I. Before Alexandria. OCTAVIUS CAESARs camp.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, and MECAENAS, with his Army; OCTAVIUS CAESAR reading a letter
He calls me boy; and chides, as he had power
To beat me out of Egypt; my messenger
He hath whippd with rods; dares me to personal combat,
Caesar to Antony: let the old ruffian know
I have many other ways to die; meantime
Laugh at his challenge.
Caesar must think,
When one so great begins to rage, hes hunted
Even to falling. Give him no breath, but now
Make boot of his distraction: never anger
Made good guard for itself.
Let our best heads
Know, that to-morrow the last of many battles
We mean to fight: within our files there are,
Of those that served Mark Antony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done:
And feast the army; we have store to dot,
And they have earnd the waste. Poor Antony!
Exeunt
SCENE II. Alexandria. CLEOPATRAs palace.
Enter MARK ANTONY, CLEOPATRA, DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, CHARMIAN, IRAS, ALEXAS, with others
He will not fight with me, Domitius.
No.
Why should he not?
He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one.
To-morrow, soldier,
By sea and land Ill fight: or I will live,
Or bathe my dying honour in the blood
Shall make it live again. Woot thou fight well?
Ill strike, and cry Take all.
Well said; come on.
Call forth my household servants: lets to-night
Be bounteous at our meal.
Enter three or four Servitors
Give me thy hand,
Thou hast been rightly honest;--so hast thou;--
Thou,--and thou,--and thou:--you have served me well,
And kings have been your fellows.
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  What means this?
[Aside to CLEOPATRA]  Tis one of those odd
tricks which sorrow shoots
Out of the mind.
And thou art honest too.
I wish I could be made so many men,
And all of you clappd up together in
An Antony, that I might do you service
So good as you have done.
The gods forbid!
Well, my good fellows, wait on me to-night:
Scant not my cups; and make as much of me
As when mine empire was your fellow too,
And sufferd my command.
[Aside to DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS]  What does he mean?
[Aside to CLEOPATRA]  To make his followers weep.
Tend me to-night;
May be it is the period of your duty:
Haply you shall not see me more; or if,
A mangled shadow: perchance to-morrow
Youll serve another master. I look on you
As one that takes his leave. Mine honest friends,
I turn you not away; but, like a master
Married to your good service, stay till death:
Tend me to-night two hours, I ask no more,
And the gods yield you fort!
What mean you, sir,
To give them this discomfort? Look, they weep;
And I, an ass, am onion-eyed: for shame,
Transform us not to women.
Ho, ho, ho!
Now the witch take me, if I meant it thus!
Grace grow where those drops fall!
My hearty friends,
You take me in too dolorous a sense;
For I spake to you for your comfort; did desire you
To burn this night with torches: know, my hearts,
I hope well of to-morrow; and will lead you
Where rather Ill expect victorious life
Than death and honour. Lets to supper, come,
And drown consideration.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. Before the palace.
Enter two Soldiers to their guard
Brother, good night: to-morrow is the day.
It will determine one way: fare you well.
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets?
Nothing. What news?
Belike tis but a rumour. Good night to you.
Well, sir, good night.
Enter two other Soldiers
Soldiers, have careful watch.
And you. Good night, good night.
They place themselves in every corner of the stage
Here we: and if to-morrow
Our navy thrive, I have an absolute hope
Our landmen will stand up.
Tis a brave army,
And full of purpose.
Music of the hautboys as under the stage
Peace! what noise?
List, list!
Hark!
Music i the air.
Under the earth.
It signs well, does it not?
No.
Peace, I say!
What should this mean?
Tis the god Hercules, whom Antony loved,
Now leaves him.
Walk; lets see if other watchmen
Do hear what we do?
They advance to another post
How now, masters!
[Speaking together]  How now!
How now! do you hear this?
Ay; ist not strange?
Do you hear, masters? do you hear?
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter;
Lets see how it will give off.
Content. Tis strange.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The same. A room in the palace.
Enter MARK ANTONY and CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, and others attending
Eros! mine armour, Eros!
Sleep a little.
No, my chuck. Eros, come; mine armour, Eros!
Enter EROS with armour
Come good fellow, put mine iron on:
If fortune be not ours to-day, it is
Because we brave her: come.
Nay, Ill help too.
Whats this for?
Ah, let be, let be! thou art
The armourer of my heart: false, false; this, this.
Sooth, la, Ill help: thus it must be.
Well, well;
We shall thrive now. Seest thou, my good fellow?
Go put on thy defences.
Briefly, sir.
Is not this buckled well?
Rarely, rarely:
He that unbuckles this, till we do please
To dafft for our repose, shall hear a storm.
Thou fumblest, Eros; and my queens a squire
More tight at this than thou: dispatch. O love,
That thou couldst see my wars to-day, and knewst
The royal occupation! thou shouldst see
A workman int.
Enter an armed Soldier
Good morrow to thee; welcome:
Thou lookst like him that knows a warlike charge:
To business that we love we rise betime,
And go tot with delight.
A thousand, sir,
Early thought be, have on their riveted trim,
And at the port expect you.
Shout. Trumpets flourish
Enter Captains and Soldiers
The morn is fair. Good morrow, general.
Good morrow, general.
Tis well blown, lads:
This morning, like the spirit of a youth
That means to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so; come, give me that: this way; well said.
Fare thee well, dame, whateer becomes of me:
This is a soldiers kiss: rebukeable
Kisses her
And worthy shameful cheque it were, to stand
On more mechanic compliment; Ill leave thee
Now, like a man of steel. You that will fight,
Follow me close; Ill bring you tot. Adieu.
Exeunt MARK ANTONY, EROS, Captains, and Soldiers
Please you, retire to your chamber.
Lead me.
He goes forth gallantly. That he and Caesar might
Determine this great war in single fight!
Then Antony,--but now--Well, on.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Alexandria. MARK ANTONYs camp.
Trumpets sound. Enter MARK ANTONY and EROS; a Soldier meeting them
The gods make this a happy day to Antony!
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevaild
To make me fight at land!
Hadst thou done so,
The kings that have revolted, and the soldier
That has this morning left thee, would have still
Followd thy heels.
Whos gone this morning?
Who!
One ever near thee: call for Enobarbus,
He shall not hear thee; or from Caesars camp
Say I am none of thine.
What sayst thou?
Sir,
He is with Caesar.
Sir, his chests and treasure
He has not with him.
Is he gone?
Most certain.
Go, Eros, send his treasure after; do it;
Detain no jot, I charge thee: write to him--
I will subscribe--gentle adieus and greetings;
Say that I wish he never find more cause
To change a master. O, my fortunes have
Corrupted honest men! Dispatch.--Enobarbus!
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Alexandria. OCTAVIUS CAESARs camp.
Flourish. Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, with DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS, and others
Go forth, Agrippa, and begin the fight:
Our will is Antony be took alive;
Make it so known.
Caesar, I shall.
Exit
The time of universal peace is near:
Prove this a prosperous day, the three-nookd world
Shall bear the olive freely.
Enter a Messenger
Antony
Is come into the field.
Go charge Agrippa
Plant those that have revolted in the van,
That Antony may seem to spend his fury
Upon himself.
Exeunt all but DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
Alexas did revolt; and went to Jewry on
Affairs of Antony; there did persuade
Great Herod to incline himself to Caesar,
And leave his master Antony: for this pains
Caesar hath hangd him. Canidius and the rest
That fell away have entertainment, but
No honourable trust. I have done ill;
Of which I do accuse myself so sorely,
That I will joy no more.
Enter a Soldier of CAESARs
Enobarbus, Antony
Hath after thee sent all thy treasure, with
His bounty overplus: the messenger
Came on my guard; and at thy tent is now
Unloading of his mules.
I give it you.
Mock not, Enobarbus.
I tell you true: best you safed the bringer
Out of the host; I must attend mine office,
Or would have donet myself. Your emperor
Continues still a Jove.
Exit
I am alone the villain of the earth,
And feel I am so most. O Antony,
Thou mine of bounty, how wouldst thou have paid
My better service, when my turpitude
Thou dost so crown with gold! This blows my heart:
If swift thought break it not, a swifter mean
Shall outstrike thought: but thought will dot, I feel.
I fight against thee! No: I will go seek
Some ditch wherein to die; the foulst best fits
My latter part of life.
Exit
SCENE VII. Field of battle between the camps.
Alarum. Drums and trumpets. Enter AGRIPPA and others
Retire, we have engaged ourselves too far:
Caesar himself has work, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.
Exeunt
Alarums. Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS wounded
O my brave emperor, this is fought indeed!
Had we done so at first, we had droven them home
With clouts about their heads.
Thou bleedst apace.
I had a wound here that was like a T,
But now tis made an H.
They do retire.
Well beat em into bench-holes: I have yet
Room for six scotches more.
Enter EROS
They are beaten, sir, and our advantage serves
For a fair victory.
Let us score their backs,
And snatch em up, as we take hares, behind:
Tis sport to maul a runner.
I will reward thee
Once for thy spritely comfort, and ten-fold
For thy good valour. Come thee on.
Ill halt after.
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. Under the walls of Alexandria.
Alarum. Enter MARK ANTONY, in a march; SCARUS, with others
We have beat him to his camp: run one before,
And let the queen know of our gests. To-morrow,
Before the sun shall see s, well spill the blood
That has to-day escaped. I thank you all;
For doughty-handed are you, and have fought
Not as you served the cause, but as t had been
Each mans like mine; you have shown all Hectors.
Enter the city, clip your wives, your friends,
Tell them your feats; whilst they with joyful tears
Wash the congealment from your wounds, and kiss
The honourd gashes whole.
To SCARUS
Give me thy hand
Enter CLEOPATRA, attended
To this great fairy Ill commend thy acts,
Make her thanks bless thee.
To CLEOPATRA
O thou day o the world,
Chain mine armd neck; leap thou, attire and all,
Through proof of harness to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing!
Lord of lords!
O infinite virtue, comest thou smiling from
The worlds great snare uncaught?
My nightingale,
We have beat them to their beds. What, girl!
though grey
Do something mingle with our younger brown, yet ha we
A brain that nourishes our nerves, and can
Get goal for goal of youth. Behold this man;
Commend unto his lips thy favouring hand:
Kiss it, my warrior: he hath fought to-day
As if a god, in hate of mankind, had
Destroyd in such a shape.
Ill give thee, friend,
An armour all of gold; it was a kings.
He has deserved it, were it carbuncled
Like holy Phoebus car. Give me thy hand:
Through Alexandria make a jolly march;
Bear our hackd targets like the men that owe them:
Had our great palace the capacity
To camp this host, we all would sup together,
And drink carouses to the next days fate,
Which promises royal peril. Trumpeters,
With brazen din blast you the citys ear;
Make mingle with rattling tabourines;
That heaven and earth may strike their sounds together,
Applauding our approach.
Exeunt
SCENE IX. OCTAVIUS CAESARs camp.
Sentinels at their post
If we be not relieved within this hour,
We must return to the court of guard: the night
Is shiny; and they say we shall embattle
By the second hour i the morn.
This last day was
A shrewd one tos.
Enter DOMITIUS ENOBARBUS
O, bear me witness, night,--
What man is this?
Stand close, and list him.
Be witness to me, O thou blessed moon,
When men revolted shall upon record
Bear hateful memory, poor Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent!
Enobarbus!
Peace!
Hark further.
O sovereign mistress of true melancholy,
The poisonous damp of night disponge upon me,
That life, a very rebel to my will,
May hang no longer on me: throw my heart
Against the flint and hardness of my fault:
Which, being dried with grief, will break to powder,
And finish all foul thoughts. O Antony,
Nobler than my revolt is infamous,
Forgive me in thine own particular;
But let the world rank me in register
A master-leaver and a fugitive:
O Antony! O Antony!
Dies
Lets speak To him.
Lets hear him, for the things he speaks
May concern Caesar.
Lets do so. But he sleeps.
Swoons rather; for so bad a prayer as his
Was never yet for sleep.
Go we to him.
Awake, sir, awake; speak to us.
Hear you, sir?
The hand of death hath raught him.
Drums afar off
Hark! the drums
Demurely wake the sleepers. Let us bear him
To the court of guard; he is of note: our hour
Is fully out.
Come on, then;
He may recover yet.
Exeunt with the body
SCENE X. Between the two camps.
Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS, with their Army
Their preparation is to-day by sea;
We please them not by land.
For both, my lord.
I would theyld fight i the fire or i the air;
Weld fight there too. But this it is; our foot
Upon the hills adjoining to the city
Shall stay with us: order for sea is given;
They have put forth the haven
Where their appointment we may best discover,
And look on their endeavour.
Exeunt
SCENE XI. Another part of the same.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, and his Army
But being charged, we will be still by land,
Which, as I taket, we shall; for his best force
Is forth to man his galleys. To the vales,
And hold our best advantage.
Exeunt
SCENE XII. Another part of the same.
Enter MARK ANTONY and SCARUS
Yet they are not joind: where yond pine
does stand,
I shall discover all: Ill bring thee word
Straight, how tis like to go.
Exit
Swallows have built
In Cleopatras sails their nests: the augurers
Say they know not, they cannot tell; look grimly,
And dare not speak their knowledge. Antony
Is valiant, and dejected; and, by starts,
His fretted fortunes give him hope, and fear,
Of what he has, and has not.
Alarum afar off, as at a sea-fight
Re-enter MARK ANTONY
All is lost;
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me:
My fleet hath yielded to the foe; and yonder
They cast their caps up and carouse together
Like friends long lost. Triple-turnd whore!
tis thou
Hast sold me to this novice; and my heart
Makes only wars on thee. Bid them all fly;
For when I am revenged upon my charm,
I have done all. Bid them all fly; begone.
Exit SCARUS
O sun, thy uprise shall I see no more:
Fortune and Antony part here; even here
Do we shake hands. All come to this? The hearts
That spanield me at heels, to whom I gave
Their wishes, do discandy, melt their sweets
On blossoming Caesar; and this pine is barkd,
That overtoppd them all. Betrayd I am:
O this false soul of Egypt! this grave charm,--
Whose eye beckd forth my wars, and calld them home;
Whose bosom was my crownet, my chief end,--
Like a right gipsy, hath, at fast and loose,
Beguiled me to the very heart of loss.
What, Eros, Eros!
Enter CLEOPATRA
Ah, thou spell! Avaunt!
Why is my lord enraged against his love?
Vanish, or I shall give thee thy deserving,
And blemish Caesars triumph. Let him take thee,
And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians:
Follow his chariot, like the greatest spot
Of all thy sex; most monster-like, be shown
For poorst diminutives, for doits; and let
Patient Octavia plough thy visage up
With her prepared nails.
Exit CLEOPATRA
Tis well thourt gone,
If it be well to live; but better twere
Thou fellst into my fury, for one death
Might have prevented many. Eros, ho!
The shirt of Nessus is upon me: teach me,
Alcides, thou mine ancestor, thy rage:
Let me lodge Lichas on the horns o the moon;
And with those hands, that graspd the heaviest club,
Subdue my worthiest self. The witch shall die:
To the young Roman boy she hath sold me, and I fall
Under this plot; she dies fort. Eros, ho!
Exit
SCENE XIII. Alexandria. Cleopatras palace.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, IRAS, and MARDIAN
Help me, my women! O, he is more mad
Than Telamon for his shield; the boar of Thessaly
Was never so embossd.
To the monument!
There lock yourself, and send him word you are dead.
The soul and body rive not more in parting
Than greatness going off.
To the monument!
Mardian, go tell him I have slain myself;
Say, that the last I spoke was Antony,
And word it, prithee, piteously: hence, Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my death.
To the monument!
Exeunt
SCENE XIV. The same. Another room.
Enter MARK ANTONY and EROS
Eros, thou yet beholdst me?
Ay, noble lord.
Sometimes we see a cloud thats dragonish;
A vapour sometime like a bear or lion,
A towerd citadel, a pendent rock,
A forked mountain, or blue promontory
With trees upont, that nod unto the world,
And mock our eyes with air: thou hast seen
these signs;
They are black vespers pageants.
Ay, my lord,
That which is now a horse, even with a thought
The rack dislimns, and makes it indistinct,
As water is in water.
It does, my lord.
My good knave Eros, now thy captain is
Even such a body: here I am Antony:
Yet cannot hold this visible shape, my knave.
I made these wars for Egypt: and the queen,--
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine;
Which whilst it was mine had annexd untot
A million more, now lost,--she, Eros, has
Packd cards with Caesar, and false-playd my glory
Unto an enemys triumph.
Nay, weep not, gentle Eros; there is left us
Ourselves to end ourselves.
Enter MARDIAN
O! thy vile lady!
She has robbd me of my sword.
No, Antony;
My mistress loved thee, and her fortunes mingled
With thine entirely.
Hence, saucy eunuch; peace!
She hath betrayd me and shall die the death.
Death of one person can be paid but once,
And that she has discharged: what thou wouldst do
Is done unto thy hand: the last she spake
Was Antony! most noble Antony!
Then in the midst a tearing groan did break
The name of Antony; it was divided
Between her heart and lips: she renderd life,
Thy name so buried in her.
Dead, then?
Dead.
Unarm, Eros; the long days task is done,
And we must sleep.
To MARDIAN
That thou departst hence safe,
Does pay thy labour richly; go.
Exit MARDIAN
Off, pluck off:
The seven-fold shield of Ajax cannot keep
The battery from my heart. O, cleave, my sides!
Heart, once be stronger than thy continent,
Crack thy frail case! Apace, Eros, apace.
No more a soldier: bruised pieces, go;
You have been nobly borne. From me awhile.
Exit EROS
I will oertake thee, Cleopatra, and
Weep for my pardon. So it must be, for now
All length is torture: since the torch is out,
Lie down, and stray no farther: now all labour
Mars what it does; yea, very force entangles
Itself with strength: seal then, and all is done.
Eros!--I come, my queen:--Eros!--Stay for me:
Where souls do couch on flowers, well hand in hand,
And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze:
Dido and her AEneas shall want troops,
And all the haunt be ours. Come, Eros, Eros!
Re-enter EROS
What would my lord?
Since Cleopatra died,
I have lived in such dishonour, that the gods
Detest my baseness. I, that with my sword
Quarterd the world, and oer green Neptunes back
With ships made cities, condemn myself to lack
The courage of a woman; less noble mind
Than she which by her death our Caesar tells
I am conqueror of myself. Thou art sworn, Eros,
That, when the exigent should come, which now
Is come indeed, when I should see behind me
The inevitable prosecution of
Disgrace and horror, that, on my command,
Thou then wouldst kill me: dot; the time is come:
Thou strikest not me, tis Caesar thou defeatst.
Put colour in thy cheek.
The gods withhold me!
Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts,
Though enemy, lost aim, and could not?
Eros,
Wouldst thou be windowd in great Rome and see
Thy master thus with pleachd arms, bending down
His corrigible neck, his face subdued
To penetrative shame, whilst the wheeld seat
Of fortunate Caesar, drawn before him, branded
His baseness that ensued?
I would not seet.
Come, then; for with a wound I must be cured.
Draw that thy honest sword, which thou hast worn
Most useful for thy country.
O, sir, pardon me!
When I did make thee free, sworest thou not then
To do this when I bade thee? Do it at once;
Or thy precedent services are all
But accidents unpurposed. Draw, and come.
Turn from me, then, that noble countenance,
Wherein the worship of the whole world lies.
Lo thee!
Turning from him
My sword is drawn.
Then let it do at once
The thing why thou hast drawn it.
My dear master,
My captain, and my emperor, let me say,
Before I strike this bloody stroke, farewell.
Tis said, man; and farewell.
Farewell, great chief. Shall I strike now?
Now, Eros.
Why, there then: thus I do escape the sorrow
Of Antonys death.
Kills himself
Thrice-nobler than myself!
Thou teachest me, O valiant Eros, what
I should, and thou couldst not. My queen and Eros
Have by their brave instruction got upon me
A nobleness in record: but I will be
A bridegroom in my death, and run intot
As to a lovers bed. Come, then; and, Eros,
Thy master dies thy scholar: to do thus
Falling on his sword
I learnd of thee. How! not dead? not dead?
The guard, ho! O, dispatch me!
Enter DERCETAS and Guard
Whats the noise?
I have done my work in, friends: O, make an end
Of what I have begun.
The star is falln.
And time is at his period.
Alas, and woe!
Let him that loves me strike me dead.
Not I.
Nor I.
Nor any one.
Exeunt Guard
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly.
This sword but shown to Caesar, with this tidings,
Shall enter me with him.
Enter DIOMEDES
Wheres Antony?
There, Diomed there.
Lives he?
Wilt thou not answer, man?
Exit DERCETAS
Art thou there, Diomed? Draw thy sword, and give me
Sufficing strokes for death.
Most absolute lord,
My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee.
When did she send thee?
Now, my lord.
Where is she?
Lockd in her monument. She had a prophesying fear
Of what hath come to pass: for when she saw--
Which never shall be found--you did suspect
She had disposed with Caesar, and that your rage
Would not be purged, she sent you word she was dead;
But, fearing since how it might work, hath sent
Me to proclaim the truth; and I am come,
I dread, too late.
Too late, good Diomed: call my guard, I prithee.
What, ho, the emperors guard! The guard, what, ho!
Come, your lord calls!
Enter four or five of the Guard of MARK ANTONY
Bear me, good friends, where Cleopatra bides;
Tis the last service that I shall command you.
Woe, woe are we, sir, you may not live to wear
All your true followers out.
Most heavy day!
Nay, good my fellows, do not please sharp fate
To grace it with your sorrows: bid that welcome
Which comes to punish us, and we punish it
Seeming to bear it lightly. Take me up:
I have led you oft: carry me now, good friends,
And have my thanks for all.
Exeunt, bearing MARK ANTONY
SCENE XV. The same. A monument.
Enter CLEOPATRA and her maids aloft, with CHARMIAN and IRAS
O Charmian, I will never go from hence.
Be comforted, dear madam.
No, I will not:
All strange and terrible events are welcome,
But comforts we despise; our size of sorrow,
Proportiond to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.
Enter, below, DIOMEDES
How now! is he dead?
His deaths upon him, but not dead.
Look out o the other side your monument;
His guard have brought him thither.
Enter, below, MARK ANTONY, borne by the Guard
O sun,
Burn the great sphere thou movest in!
darkling stand
The varying shore o the world. O Antony,
Antony, Antony! Help, Charmian, help, Iras, help;
Help, friends below; lets draw him hither.
Peace!
Not Caesars valour hath oerthrown Antony,
But Antonys hath triumphd on itself.
So it should be, that none but Antony
Should conquer Antony; but woe tis so!
I am dying, Egypt, dying; only
I here importune death awhile, until
Of many thousand kisses the poor last
I lay up thy lips.
I dare not, dear,--
Dear my lord, pardon,--I dare not,
Lest I be taken: not the imperious show
Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall
Be broochd with me; if knife, drugs,
serpents, have
Edge, sting, or operation, I am safe:
Your wife Octavia, with her modest eyes
And still conclusion, shall acquire no honour
Demuring upon me. But come, come, Antony,--
Help me, my women,--we must draw thee up:
Assist, good friends.
O, quick, or I am gone.
Heres sport indeed! How heavy weighs my lord!
Our strength is all gone into heaviness,
That makes the weight: had I great Junos power,
The strong-wingd Mercury should fetch thee up,
And set thee by Joves side. Yet come a little,--
Wishes were ever fools,--O, come, come, come;
They heave MARK ANTONY aloft to CLEOPATRA
And welcome, welcome! die where thou hast lived:
Quicken with kissing: had my lips that power,
Thus would I wear them out.
A heavy sight!
I am dying, Egypt, dying:
Give me some wine, and let me speak a little.
No, let me speak; and let me rail so high,
That the false housewife Fortune break her wheel,
Provoked by my offence.
One word, sweet queen:
Of Caesar seek your honour, with your safety. O!
They do not go together.
Gentle, hear me:
None about Caesar trust but Proculeius.
My resolution and my hands Ill trust;
None about Caesar.
The miserable change now at my end
Lament nor sorrow at; but please your thoughts
In feeding them with those my former fortunes
Wherein I lived, the greatest prince o the world,
The noblest; and do now not basely die,
Not cowardly put off my helmet to
My countryman,--a Roman by a Roman
Valiantly vanquishd. Now my spirit is going;
I can no more.
Noblest of men, woot die?
Hast thou no care of me? shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better than a sty? O, see, my women,
MARK ANTONY dies
The crown o the earth doth melt. My lord!
O, witherd is the garland of the war,
The soldiers pole is falln: young boys and girls
Are level now with men; the odds is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkable
Beneath the visiting moon.
Faints
O, quietness, lady!
She is dead too, our sovereign.
Lady!
Madam!
O madam, madam, madam!
Royal Egypt, Empress!
Peace, peace, Iras!
No more, but een a woman, and commanded
By such poor passion as the maid that milks
And does the meanest chares. It were for me
To throw my sceptre at the injurious gods;
To tell them that this world did equal theirs
Till they had stoln our jewel. Alls but naught;
Patience is scottish, and impatience does
Become a dog thats mad: then is it sin
To rush into the secret house of death,
Ere death dare come to us? How do you, women?
What, what! good cheer! Why, how now, Charmian!
My noble girls! Ah, women, women, look,
Our lamp is spent, its out! Good sirs, take heart:
Well bury him; and then, whats brave,
whats noble,
Lets do it after the high Roman fashion,
And make death proud to take us. Come, away:
This case of that huge spirit now is cold:
Ah, women, women! come; we have no friend
But resolution, and the briefest end.
Exeunt; those above bearing off MARK ANTONYs body
ACT V
SCENE I. Alexandria. OCTAVIUS CAESARs camp.
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, AGRIPPA, DOLABELLA, MECAENAS, GALLUS, PROCULEIUS, and others, his council of war
Go to him, Dolabella, bid him yield;
Being so frustrate, tell him he mocks
The pauses that he makes.
Caesar, I shall.
Exit
Enter DERCETAS, with the sword of MARK ANTONY
Wherefore is that? and what art thou that darest
Appear thus to us?
I am calld Dercetas;
Mark Antony I served, who best was worthy
Best to be served: whilst he stood up and spoke,
He was my master; and I wore my life
To spend upon his haters. If thou please
To take me to thee, as I was to him
Ill be to Caesar; if thou pleasest not,
I yield thee up my life.
What ist thou sayst?
I say, O Caesar, Antony is dead.
The breaking of so great a thing should make
A greater crack: the round world
Should have shook lions into civil streets,
And citizens to their dens: the death of Antony
Is not a single doom; in the name lay
A moiety of the world.
He is dead, Caesar:
Not by a public minister of justice,
Nor by a hired knife; but that self hand,
Which writ his honour in the acts it did,
Hath, with the courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his sword;
I robbd his wound of it; behold it staind
With his most noble blood.
Look you sad, friends?
The gods rebuke me, but it is tidings
To wash the eyes of kings.
And strange it is,
That nature must compel us to lament
Our most persisted deeds.
His taints and honours
Waged equal with him.
A rarer spirit never
Did steer humanity: but you, gods, will give us
Some faults to make us men. Caesar is touchd.
When such a spacious mirrors set before him,
He needs must see himself.
O Antony!
I have followd thee to this; but we do lance
Diseases in our bodies: I must perforce
Have shown to thee such a declining day,
Or look on thine; we could not stall together
In the whole world: but yet let me lament,
With tears as sovereign as the blood of hearts,
That thou, my brother, my competitor
In top of all design, my mate in empire,
Friend and companion in the front of war,
The arm of mine own body, and the heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle,--that our stars,
Unreconciliable, should divide
Our equalness to this. Hear me, good friends--
But I will tell you at some meeter season:
Enter an Egyptian
The business of this man looks out of him;
Well hear him what he says. Whence are you?
A poor Egyptian yet. The queen my mistress,
Confined in all she has, her monument,
Of thy intents desires instruction,
That she preparedly may frame herself
To the way shes forced to.
Bid her have good heart:
She soon shall know of us, by some of ours,
How honourable and how kindly we
Determine for her; for Caesar cannot live
To be ungentle.
So the gods preserve thee!
Exit
Come hither, Proculeius. Go and say,
We purpose her no shame: give her what comforts
The quality of her passion shall require,
Lest, in her greatness, by some mortal stroke
She do defeat us; for her life in Rome
Would be eternal in our triumph: go,
And with your speediest bring us what she says,
And how you find of her.
Caesar, I shall.
Exit
Gallus, go you along.
Exit GALLUS
Wheres Dolabella,
To second Proculeius?
Dolabella!
Let him alone, for I remember now
How hes employd: he shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my tent; where you shall see
How hardly I was drawn into this war;
How calm and gentle I proceeded still
In all my writings: go with me, and see
What I can show in this.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Alexandria. A room in the monument.
Enter CLEOPATRA, CHARMIAN, and IRAS
My desolation does begin to make
A better life. Tis paltry to be Caesar;
Not being Fortune, hes but Fortunes knave,
A minister of her will: and it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds;
Which shackles accidents and bolts up change;
Which sleeps, and never palates more the dug,
The beggars nurse and Caesars.
Enter, to the gates of the monument, PROCULEIUS, GALLUS and Soldiers
Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt;
And bids thee study on what fair demands
Thou meanst to have him grant thee.
Whats thy name?
My name is Proculeius.
Antony
Did tell me of you, bade me trust you; but
I do not greatly care to be deceived,
That have no use for trusting. If your master
Would have a queen his beggar, you must tell him,
That majesty, to keep decorum, must
No less beg than a kingdom: if he please
To give me conquerd Egypt for my son,
He gives me so much of mine own, as I
Will kneel to him with thanks.
Be of good cheer;
Youre falln into a princely hand, fear nothing:
Make your full reference freely to my lord,
Who is so full of grace, that it flows over
On all that need: let me report to him
Your sweet dependency; and you shall find
A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness,
Where he for grace is kneeld to.
Pray you, tell him
I am his fortunes vassal, and I send him
The greatness he has got. I hourly learn
A doctrine of obedience; and would gladly
Look him i the face.
This Ill report, dear lady.
Have comfort, for I know your plight is pitied
Of him that caused it.
You see how easily she may be surprised:
