Givet me again: poor lady, shell run mad
When she shall lack it.
Be not acknown on t; I have use for it.
Go, leave me.
Exit EMILIA
I will in Cassios lodging lose this napkin,
And let him find it. Trifles light as air
Are to the jealous confirmations strong
As proofs of holy writ: this may do something.
The Moor already changes with my poison:
Dangerous conceits are, in their natures, poisons.
Which at the first are scarce found to distaste,
But with a little act upon the blood.
Burn like the mines of Sulphur. I did say so:
Look, where he comes!
Re-enter OTHELLO
Not poppy, nor mandragora,
Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,
Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep
Which thou owedst yesterday.
Ha! ha! false to me?
Why, how now, general! no more of that.
Avaunt! be gone! thou hast set me on the rack:
I swear tis better to be much abused
Than but to knowt a little.
How now, my lord!
What sense had I of her stoln hours of lust?
I sawt not, thought it not, it harmd not me:
I slept the next night well, was free and merry;
I found not Cassios kisses on her lips:
He that is robbd, not wanting what is stoln,
Let him not knowt, and hes not robbd at all.
I am sorry to hear this.
I had been happy, if the general camp,
Pioners and all, had tasted her sweet body,
So I had nothing known. O, now, for ever
Farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content!
Farewell the plumed troop, and the big wars,
That make ambition virtue! O, farewell!
Farewell the neighing steed, and the shrill trump,
The spirit-stirring drum, the ear-piercing fife,
The royal banner, and all quality,
Pride, pomp and circumstance of glorious war!
And, O you mortal engines, whose rude throats
The immortal Joves dead clamours counterfeit,
Farewell! Othellos occupations gone!
Ist possible, my lord?
Villain, be sure thou prove my love a whore,
Be sure of it; give me the ocular proof:
Or by the worth of mans eternal soul,
Thou hadst been better have been born a dog
Than answer my waked wrath!
Ist come to this?
Make me to seet; or, at the least, so prove it,
That the probation bear no hinge nor loop
To hang a doubt on; or woe upon thy life!
My noble lord,--
If thou dost slander her and torture me,
Never pray more; abandon all remorse;
On horrors head horrors accumulate;
Do deeds to make heaven weep, all earth amazed;
For nothing canst thou to damnation add
Greater than that.
O grace! O heaven forgive me!
Are you a man? have you a soul or sense?
God be wi you; take mine office. O wretched fool.
That livest to make thine honesty a vice!
O monstrous world! Take note, take note, O world,
To be direct and honest is not safe.
I thank you for this profit; and from hence
Ill love no friend, sith love breeds such offence.
Nay, stay: thou shouldst be honest.
I should be wise, for honestys a fool
And loses that it works for.
By the world,
I think my wife be honest and think she is not;
I think that thou art just and think thou art not.
Ill have some proof. Her name, that was as fresh
As Dians visage, is now begrimed and black
As mine own face. If there be cords, or knives,
Poison, or fire, or suffocating streams,
Ill not endure it. Would I were satisfied!
I see, sir, you are eaten up with passion:
I do repent me that I put it to you.
You would be satisfied?
Would! nay, I will.
And may: but, how? how satisfied, my lord?
Would you, the supervisor, grossly gape on--
Behold her toppd?
Death and damnation! O!
It were a tedious difficulty, I think,
To bring them to that prospect: damn them then,
If ever mortal eyes do see them bolster
More than their own! What then? how then?
What shall I say? Wheres satisfaction?
It is impossible you should see this,
Were they as prime as goats, as hot as monkeys,
As salt as wolves in pride, and fools as gross
As ignorance made drunk. But yet, I say,
If imputation and strong circumstances,
Which lead directly to the door of truth,
Will give you satisfaction, you may havet.
Give me a living reason shes disloyal.
I do not like the office:
But, sith I am enterd in this cause so far,
Prickd tot by foolish honesty and love,
I will go on. I lay with Cassio lately;
And, being troubled with a raging tooth,
I could not sleep.
There are a kind of men so loose of soul,
That in their sleeps will mutter their affairs:
One of this kind is Cassio:
In sleep I heard him say Sweet Desdemona,
Let us be wary, let us hide our loves;
And then, sir, would he gripe and wring my hand,
Cry O sweet creature! and then kiss me hard,
As if he pluckd up kisses by the roots
That grew upon my lips: then laid his leg
Over my thigh, and sighd, and kissd; and then
Cried Cursed fate that gave thee to the Moor!
O monstrous! monstrous!
Nay, this was but his dream.
But this denoted a foregone conclusion:
Tis a shrewd doubt, though it be but a dream.
And this may help to thicken other proofs
That do demonstrate thinly.
Ill tear her all to pieces.
Nay, but be wise: yet we see nothing done;
She may be honest yet. Tell me but this,
Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief
Spotted with strawberries in your wifes hand?
I gave her such a one; twas my first gift.
I know not that; but such a handkerchief--
I am sure it was your wifes--did I to-day
See Cassio wipe his beard with.
If it be that--
If it be that, or any that was hers,
It speaks against her with the other proofs.
O, that the slave had forty thousand lives!
One is too poor, too weak for my revenge.
Now do I see tis true. Look here, Iago;
All my fond love thus do I blow to heaven.
Tis gone.
Arise, black vengeance, from thy hollow cell!
Yield up, O love, thy crown and hearted throne
To tyrannous hate! Swell, bosom, with thy fraught,
For tis of aspics tongues!
Yet be content.
O, blood, blood, blood!
Patience, I say; your mind perhaps may change.
Never, Iago: Like to the Pontic sea,
Whose icy current and compulsive course
Neer feels retiring ebb, but keeps due on
To the Propontic and the Hellespont,
Even so my bloody thoughts, with violent pace,
Shall neer look back, neer ebb to humble love,
Till that a capable and wide revenge
Swallow them up. Now, by yond marble heaven,
Kneels
In the due reverence of a sacred vow
I here engage my words.
Do not rise yet.
Kneels
Witness, you ever-burning lights above,
You elements that clip us round about,
Witness that here Iago doth give up
The execution of his wit, hands, heart,
To wrongd Othellos service! Let him command,
And to obey shall be in me remorse,
What bloody business ever.
They rise
I greet thy love,
Not with vain thanks, but with acceptance bounteous,
And will upon the instant put thee tot:
Within these three days let me hear thee say
That Cassios not alive.
My friend is dead; tis done at your request:
But let her live.
Damn her, lewd minx! O, damn her!
Come, go with me apart; I will withdraw,
To furnish me with some swift means of death
For the fair devil. Now art thou my lieutenant.
I am your own for ever.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Before the castle.
Enter DESDEMONA, EMILIA, and Clown
Do you know, sirrah, where Lieutenant Cassio lies?
I dare not say he lies any where.
Why, man?
Hes a soldier, and for one to say a soldier lies,
is stabbing.
Go to: where lodges he?
To tell you where he lodges, is to tell you where I lie.
Can any thing be made of this?
I know not where he lodges, and for me to devise a
lodging and say he lies here or he lies there, were
to lie in mine own throat.
Can you inquire him out, and be edified by report?
I will catechise the world for him; that is, make
questions, and by them answer.
Seek him, bid him come hither: tell him I have
moved my lord on his behalf, and hope all will be well.
To do this is within the compass of mans wit: and
therefore I will attempt the doing it.
Exit
Where should I lose that handkerchief, Emilia?
I know not, madam.
Believe me, I had rather have lost my purse
Full of crusadoes: and, but my noble Moor
Is true of mind and made of no such baseness
As jealous creatures are, it were enough
To put him to ill thinking.
Is he not jealous?
Who, he? I think the sun where he was born
Drew all such humours from him.
Look, where he comes.
I will not leave him now till Cassio
Be calld to him.
Enter OTHELLO
How ist with you, my lord
Well, my good lady.
Aside
O, hardness to dissemble!--
How do you, Desdemona?
Well, my good lord.
Give me your hand: this hand is moist, my lady.
It yet hath felt no age nor known no sorrow.
This argues fruitfulness and liberal heart:
Hot, hot, and moist: this hand of yours requires
A sequester from liberty, fasting and prayer,
Much castigation, exercise devout;
For heres a young and sweating devil here,
That commonly rebels. Tis a good hand,
A frank one.
You may, indeed, say so;
For twas that hand that gave away my heart.
A liberal hand: the hearts of old gave hands;
But our new heraldry is hands, not hearts.
I cannot speak of this. Come now, your promise.
What promise, chuck?
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you.
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me;
Lend me thy handkerchief.
Here, my lord.
That which I gave you.
I have it not about me.
Not?
No, indeed, my lord.
That is a fault.
That handkerchief
Did an Egyptian to my mother give;
She was a charmer, and could almost read
The thoughts of people: she told her, while
she kept it,
Twould make her amiable and subdue my father
Entirely to her love, but if she lost it
Or made gift of it, my fathers eye
Should hold her loathed and his spirits should hunt
After new fancies: she, dying, gave it me;
And bid me, when my fate would have me wive,
To give it her. I did so: and take heed ont;
Make it a darling like your precious eye;
To loset or givet away were such perdition
As nothing else could match.
Ist possible?
Tis true: theres magic in the web of it:
A sibyl, that had numberd in the world
The sun to course two hundred compasses,
In her prophetic fury sewd the work;
The worms were hallowd that did breed the silk;
And it was dyed in mummy which the skilful
Conserved of maidens hearts.
Indeed! ist true?
Most veritable; therefore look tot well.
Then would to God that I had never seent!
Ha! wherefore?
Why do you speak so startingly and rash?
Ist lost? ist gone? speak, is it out
o the way?
Heaven bless us!
Say you?
It is not lost; but what an if it were?
How!
I say, it is not lost.
Fetcht, let me seet.
Why, so I can, sir, but I will not now.
This is a trick to put me from my suit:
Pray you, let Cassio be received again.
Fetch me the handkerchief: my mind misgives.
Come, come;
Youll never meet a more sufficient man.
The handkerchief!
I pray, talk me of Cassio.
The handkerchief!
A man that all his time
Hath founded his good fortunes on your love,
Shared dangers with you,--
The handkerchief!
In sooth, you are to blame.
Away!
Exit
Is not this man jealous?
I neer saw this before.
Sure, theres some wonder in this handkerchief:
I am most unhappy in the loss of it.
Tis not a year or two shows us a man:
They are all but stomachs, and we all but food;
To eat us hungerly, and when they are full,
They belch us. Look you, Cassio and my husband!
Enter CASSIO and IAGO
There is no other way; tis she must dot:
And, lo, the happiness! go, and importune her.
How now, good Cassio! whats the news with you?
Madam, my former suit: I do beseech you
That by your virtuous means I may again
Exist, and be a member of his love
Whom I with all the office of my heart
Entirely honour: I would not be delayd.
If my offence be of such mortal kind
That nor my service past, nor present sorrows,
Nor purposed merit in futurity,
Can ransom me into his love again,
But to know so must be my benefit;
So shall I clothe me in a forced content,
And shut myself up in some other course,
To fortunes alms.
Alas, thrice-gentle Cassio!
My advocation is not now in tune;
My lord is not my lord; nor should I know him,
Were he in favour as in humour alterd.
So help me every spirit sanctified,
As I have spoken for you all my best
And stood within the blank of his displeasure
For my free speech! you must awhile be patient:
What I can do I will; and more I will
Than for myself I dare: let that suffice you.
Is my lord angry?
He went hence but now,
And certainly in strange unquietness.
Can he be angry? I have seen the cannon,
When it hath blown his ranks into the air,
And, like the devil, from his very arm
Puffd his own brother:--and can he be angry?
Something of moment then: I will go meet him:
Theres matter int indeed, if he be angry.
I prithee, do so.
Exit IAGO
Something, sure, of state,
Either from Venice, or some unhatchd practise
Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him,
Hath puddled his clear spirit: and in such cases
Mens natures wrangle with inferior things,
Though great ones are their object. Tis even so;
For let our finger ache, and it indues
Our other healthful members even to that sense
Of pain: nay, we must think men are not gods,
Nor of them look for such observances
As fit the bridal. Beshrew me much, Emilia,
I was, unhandsome warrior as I am,
Arraigning his unkindness with my soul;
But now I find I had subornd the witness,
And hes indicted falsely.
Pray heaven it be state-matters, as you think,
And no conception nor no jealous toy
Concerning you.
Alas the day! I never gave him cause.
But jealous souls will not be answerd so;
They are not ever jealous for the cause,
But jealous for they are jealous: tis a monster
Begot upon itself, born on itself.
Heaven keep that monster from Othellos mind!
Lady, amen.
I will go seek him. Cassio, walk hereabout:
If I do find him fit, Ill move your suit
And seek to effect it to my uttermost.
I humbly thank your ladyship.
Exeunt DESDEMONA and EMILIA
Enter BIANCA
Save you, friend Cassio!
What make you from home?
How is it with you, my most fair Bianca?
I faith, sweet love, I was coming to your house.
And I was going to your lodging, Cassio.
What, keep a week away? seven days and nights?
Eight score eight hours? and lovers absent hours,
More tedious than the dial eight score times?
O weary reckoning!
Pardon me, Bianca:
I have this while with leaden thoughts been pressd:
But I shall, in a more continuate time,
Strike off this score of absence. Sweet Bianca,
Giving her DESDEMONAs handkerchief
Take me this work out.
O Cassio, whence came this?
This is some token from a newer friend:
To the felt absence now I feel a cause:
Ist come to this? Well, well.
Go to, woman!
Throw your vile guesses in the devils teeth,
From whence you have them. You are jealous now
That this is from some mistress, some remembrance:
No, in good troth, Bianca.
Why, whose is it?
I know not, sweet: I found it in my chamber.
I like the work well: ere it be demanded--
As like enough it will--Ild have it copied:
Take it, and dot; and leave me for this time.
Leave you! wherefore?
I do attend here on the general;
And think it no addition, nor my wish,
To have him see me womand.
Why, I pray you?
Not that I love you not.
But that you do not love me.
I pray you, bring me on the way a little,
And say if I shall see you soon at night.
Tis but a little way that I can bring you;
For I attend here: but Ill see you soon.
Tis very good; I must be circumstanced.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Cyprus. Before the castle.
Enter OTHELLO and IAGO
Will you think so?
Think so, Iago!
What,
To kiss in private?
An unauthorized kiss.
Or to be naked with her friend in bed
An hour or more, not meaning any harm?
Naked in bed, Iago, and not mean harm!
It is hypocrisy against the devil:
They that mean virtuously, and yet do so,
The devil their virtue tempts, and they tempt heaven.
So they do nothing, tis a venial slip:
But if I give my wife a handkerchief,--
What then?
Why, then, tis hers, my lord; and, being hers,
She may, I think, bestowt on any man.
She is protectress of her honour too:
May she give that?
Her honour is an essence thats not seen;
They have it very oft that have it not:
But, for the handkerchief,--
By heaven, I would most gladly have forgot it.
Thou saidst, it comes oer my memory,
As doth the raven oer the infected house,
Boding to all--he had my handkerchief.
Ay, what of that?
Thats not so good now.
What,
If I had said I had seen him do you wrong?
Or heard him say,--as knaves be such abroad,
Who having, by their own importunate suit,
Or voluntary dotage of some mistress,
Convinced or supplied them, cannot choose
But they must blab--
Hath he said any thing?
He hath, my lord; but be you well assured,
No more than hell unswear.
What hath he said?
Faith, that he did--I know not what he did.
What? what?
Lie--
With her?
With her, on her; what you will.
Lie with her! lie on her! We say lie on her, when
they belie her. Lie with her! thats fulsome.
--Handkerchief--confessions--handkerchief!--To
confess, and be hanged for his labour;--first, to be
hanged, and then to confess.--I tremble at it.
Nature would not invest herself in such shadowing
passion without some instruction. It is not words
that shake me thus. Pish! Noses, ears, and lips.
--Ist possible?--Confess--handkerchief!--O devil!--
Falls in a trance
Work on,
My medicine, work! Thus credulous fools are caught;
And many worthy and chaste dames even thus,
All guiltless, meet reproach. What, ho! my lord!
My lord, I say! Othello!
Enter CASSIO
How now, Cassio!
Whats the matter?
My lord is falln into an epilepsy:
This is his second fit; he had one yesterday.
Rub him about the temples.
No, forbear;
The lethargy must have his quiet course:
If not, he foams at mouth and by and by
Breaks out to savage madness. Look he stirs:
Do you withdraw yourself a little while,
He will recover straight: when he is gone,
I would on great occasion speak with you.
Exit CASSIO
How is it, general? have you not hurt your head?
Dost thou mock me?
I mock you! no, by heaven.
Would you would bear your fortune like a man!
A horned mans a monster and a beast.
Theres many a beast then in a populous city,
And many a civil monster.
Did he confess it?
Good sir, be a man;
Think every bearded fellow thats but yoked
May draw with you: theres millions now alive
That nightly lie in those unproper beds
Which they dare swear peculiar: your case is better.
O, tis the spite of hell, the fiends arch-mock,
To lip a wanton in a secure couch,
And to suppose her chaste! No, let me know;
And knowing what I am, I know what she shall be.
O, thou art wise; tis certain.
Stand you awhile apart;
Confine yourself but in a patient list.
Whilst you were here oerwhelmed with your grief--
A passion most unsuiting such a man--
Cassio came hither: I shifted him away,
And laid good scuse upon your ecstasy,
Bade him anon return and here speak with me;
The which he promised. Do but encave yourself,
And mark the fleers, the gibes, and notable scorns,
That dwell in every region of his face;
For I will make him tell the tale anew,
Where, how, how oft, how long ago, and when
He hath, and is again to cope your wife:
I say, but mark his gesture. Marry, patience;
Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen,
And nothing of a man.
Dost thou hear, Iago?
I will be found most cunning in my patience;
But--dost thou hear?--most bloody.
Thats not amiss;
But yet keep time in all. Will you withdraw?
OTHELLO retires
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca,
A housewife that by selling her desires
Buys herself bread and clothes: it is a creature
That dotes on Cassio; as tis the strumpets plague
To beguile many and be beguiled by one:
He, when he hears of her, cannot refrain
From the excess of laughter. Here he comes:
Re-enter CASSIO
As he shall smile, Othello shall go mad;
And his unbookish jealousy must construe
Poor Cassios smiles, gestures and light behavior,
Quite in the wrong. How do you now, lieutenant?
The worser that you give me the addition
Whose want even kills me.
Ply Desdemona well, and you are sure ont.
Speaking lower
Now, if this suit lay in Biancos power,
How quickly should you speed!
Alas, poor caitiff!
Look, how he laughs already!
I never knew woman love man so.
Alas, poor rogue! I think, i faith, she loves me.
Now he denies it faintly, and laughs it out.
Do you hear, Cassio?
Now he importunes him
To tell it oer: go to; well said, well said.
She gives it out that you shall marry hey:
Do you intend it?
Ha, ha, ha!
Do you triumph, Roman? do you triumph?
I marry her! what? a customer! Prithee, bear some
charity to my wit: do not think it so unwholesome.
Ha, ha, ha!
So, so, so, so: they laugh that win.
Faith, the cry goes that you shall marry her.
Prithee, say true.
I am a very villain else.
Have you scored me? Well.
This is the monkeys own giving out: she is
persuaded I will marry her, out of her own love and
flattery, not out of my promise.
Iago beckons me; now he begins the story.
She was here even now; she haunts me in every place.
I was the other day talking on the sea-bank with
certain Venetians; and thither comes the bauble,
and, by this hand, she falls me thus about my neck--
Crying O dear Cassio! as it were: his gesture
imports it.
So hangs, and lolls, and weeps upon me; so hales,
and pulls me: ha, ha, ha!
Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber. O,
I see that nose of yours, but not that dog I shall
throw it to.
Well, I must leave her company.
Before me! look, where she comes.
Tis such another fitchew! marry a perfumed one.
Enter BIANCA
What do you mean by this haunting of me?
Let the devil and his dam haunt you! What did you
mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now?
I was a fine fool to take it. I must take out the
work?--A likely piece of work, that you should find
it in your chamber, and not know who left it there!
This is some minxs token, and I must take out the
work? There; give it your hobby-horse: wheresoever
you had it, Ill take out no work ont.
How now, my sweet Bianca! how now! how now!
By heaven, that should be my handkerchief!
An youll come to supper to-night, you may; an you
will not, come when you are next prepared for.
Exit
After her, after her.
Faith, I must; shell rail in the street else.
Will you sup there?
Faith, I intend so.
Well, I may chance to see you; for I would very fain
speak with you.
Prithee, come; will you?
Go to; say no more.
Exit CASSIO
[Advancing]  How shall I murder him, Iago?
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice?
O Iago!
And did you see the handkerchief?
Was that mine?
Yours by this hand: and to see how he prizes the
foolish woman your wife! she gave it him, and he
hath given it his whore.
I would have him nine years a-killing.
A fine woman! a fair woman! a sweet woman!
Nay, you must forget that.
Ay, let her rot, and perish, and be damned to-night;
for she shall not live: no, my heart is turned to
stone; I strike it, and it hurts my hand. O, the
world hath not a sweeter creature: she might lie by
an emperors side and command him tasks.
Nay, thats not your way.
Hang her! I do but say what she is: so delicate
with her needle: an admirable musician: O! she
will sing the savageness out of a bear: of so high
and plenteous wit and invention:--
Shes the worse for all this.
O, a thousand thousand times: and then, of so
gentle a condition!
Ay, too gentle.
Nay, thats certain: but yet the pity of it, Iago!
O Iago, the pity of it, Iago!
If you are so fond over her iniquity, give her
patent to offend; for, if it touch not you, it comes
near nobody.
I will chop her into messes: cuckold me!
O, tis foul in her.
With mine officer!
Thats fouler.
Get me some poison, Iago; this night: Ill not
expostulate with her, lest her body and beauty
unprovide my mind again: this night, Iago.
Do it not with poison, strangle her in her bed, even
the bed she hath contaminated.
Good, good: the justice of it pleases: very good.
And for Cassio, let me be his undertaker: you
shall hear more by midnight.
Excellent good.
A trumpet within
What trumpet is that same?
Something from Venice, sure. Tis Lodovico
Come from the duke: and, see, your wife is with him.
Enter LODOVICO, DESDEMONA, and Attendants
Save you, worthy general!
With all my heart, sir.
The duke and senators of Venice greet you.
Gives him a letter
I kiss the instrument of their pleasures.
Opens the letter, and reads
And whats the news, good cousin Lodovico?
I am very glad to see you, signior
Welcome to Cyprus.
I thank you. How does Lieutenant Cassio?
Lives, sir.
Cousin, theres falln between him and my lord
An unkind breach: but you shall make all well.
Are you sure of that?
My lord?
[Reads]  This fail you not to do, as you will--
He did not call; hes busy in the paper.
Is there division twixt my lord and Cassio?
A most unhappy one: I would do much
To atone them, for the love I bear to Cassio.
Fire and brimstone!
My lord?
Are you wise?
What, is he angry?
May be the letter moved him;
For, as I think, they do command him home,
Deputing Cassio in his government.
Trust me, I am glad ont.
Indeed!
My lord?
I am glad to see you mad.
Why, sweet Othello,--
[Striking her]  Devil!
I have not deserved this.
My lord, this would not be believed in Venice,
Though I should swear I sawt: tis very much:
Make her amends; she weeps.
O devil, devil!
If that the earth could teem with womans tears,
Each drop she falls would prove a crocodile.
Out of my sight!
I will not stay to offend you.
Going
Truly, an obedient lady:
I do beseech your lordship, call her back.
Mistress!
My lord?
What would you with her, sir?
Who, I, my lord?
Ay; you did wish that I would make her turn:
Sir, she can turn, and turn, and yet go on,
And turn again; and she can weep, sir, weep;
And shes obedient, as you say, obedient,
Very obedient. Proceed you in your tears.
Concerning this, sir,--O  well-painted passion!--
I am commanded home. Get you away;
Ill send for you anon. Sir, I obey the mandate,
And will return to Venice. Hence, avaunt!
Exit DESDEMONA
Cassio shall have my place. And, sir, tonight,
I do entreat that we may sup together:
You are welcome, sir, to Cyprus.--Goats and monkeys!
Exit
Is this the noble Moor whom our full senate
Call all in all sufficient? Is this the nature
Whom passion could not shake? whose solid virtue
The shot of accident, nor dart of chance,
Could neither graze nor pierce?
He is much changed.
Are his wits safe? is he not light of brain?
Hes that he is: I may not breathe my censure
What he might be: if what he might he is not,
I would to heaven he were!
What, strike his wife!
Faith, that was not so well; yet would I knew
That stroke would prove the worst!
Is it his use?
Or did the letters work upon his blood,
And new-create this fault?
Alas, alas!
It is not honesty in me to speak
What I have seen and known. You shall observe him,
And his own courses will denote him so
That I may save my speech: do but go after,
And mark how he continues.
I am sorry that I am deceived in him.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A room in the castle.
Enter OTHELLO and EMILIA
You have seen nothing then?
Nor ever heard, nor ever did suspect.
Yes, you have seen Cassio and she together.
But then I saw no harm, and then I heard
Each syllable that breath made up between them.
What, did they never whisper?
Never, my lord.
Nor send you out o the way?
Never.
To fetch her fan, her gloves, her mask, nor nothing?
Never, my lord.
Thats strange.
I durst, my lord, to wager she is honest,
Lay down my soul at stake: if you think other,
Remove your thought; it doth abuse your bosom.
If any wretch have put this in your head,
Let heaven requite it with the serpents curse!
For, if she be not honest, chaste, and true,
Theres no man happy; the purest of their wives
Is foul as slander.
Bid her come hither: go.
Exit EMILIA
She says enough; yet shes a simple bawd
That cannot say as much. This is a subtle whore,
A closet lock and key of villanous secrets
And yet shell kneel and pray; I have seen her dot.
Enter DESDEMONA with EMILIA
My lord, what is your will?
Pray, chuck, come hither.
What is your pleasure?
Let me see your eyes;
Look in my face.
What horrible fancys this?
[To EMILIA]  Some of your function, mistress;
Leave procreants alone and shut the door;
Cough, or cry hem, if any body come:
Your mystery, your mystery: nay, dispatch.
Exit EMILIA
Upon my knees, what doth your speech import?
I understand a fury in your words.
But not the words.
Why, what art thou?
Your wife, my lord; your true
And loyal wife.
Come, swear it, damn thyself
Lest, being like one of heaven, the devils themselves
Should fear to seize thee: therefore be double damnd:
Swear thou art honest.
Heaven doth truly know it.
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell.
To whom, my lord? with whom? how am I false?
O Desdemona! away! away! away!
Alas the heavy day! Why do you weep?
Am I the motive of these tears, my lord?
If haply you my father do suspect
An instrument of this your calling back,
Lay not your blame on me: If you have lost him,
Why, I have lost him too.
Had it pleased heaven
To try me with affliction; had they raind
All kinds of sores and shames on my bare head.
Steepd me in poverty to the very lips,
Given to captivity me and my utmost hopes,
I should have found in some place of my soul
A drop of patience: but, alas, to make me
A fixed figure for the time of scorn
To point his slow unmoving finger at!
Yet could I bear that too; well, very well:
But there, where I have garnerd up my heart,
Where either I must live, or bear no life;
The fountain from the which my current runs,
Or else dries up; to be discarded thence!
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads
To knot and gender in! Turn thy complexion there,
Patience, thou young and rose-lippd cherubin,--
Ay, there, look grim as hell!
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest.
O, ay; as summer flies are in the shambles,
That quicken even with blowing. O thou weed,
Who art so lovely fair and smellst so sweet
That the sense aches at thee, would thou hadst
neer been born!
Alas, what ignorant sin have I committed?
Was this fair paper, this most goodly book,
Made to write whore upon? What committed!
Committed! O thou public commoner!
I should make very forges of my cheeks,
That would to cinders burn up modesty,
Did I but speak thy deeds. What committed!
Heaven stops the nose at it and the moon winks,
The bawdy wind that kisses all it meets
Is hushd within the hollow mine of earth,
And will not hear it. What committed!
Impudent strumpet!
By heaven, you do me wrong.
Are you not a strumpet?
No, as I am a Christian:
If to preserve this vessel for my lord
From any other foul unlawful touch
Be not to be a strumpet, I am none.
What, not a whore?
No, as I shall be saved.
Ist possible?
O, heaven forgive us!
I cry you mercy, then:
I took you for that cunning whore of Venice
That married with Othello.
Raising his voice
You, mistress,
That have the office opposite to Saint Peter,
And keep the gate of hell!
Re-enter EMILIA
You, you, ay, you!
We have done our course; theres money for your pains:
I pray you, turn the key and keep our counsel.
Exit
Alas, what does this gentleman conceive?
How do you, madam? how do you, my good lady?
Faith, half asleep.
Good madam, whats the matter with my lord?
With who?
Why, with my lord, madam.
Who is thy lord?
He that is yours, sweet lady.
I have none: do not talk to me, Emilia;
I cannot weep; nor answer have I none,
But what should go by water. Prithee, tonight
Lay on my bed my wedding sheets: remember;
And call thy husband hither.
Heres a change indeed!
Exit
Tis meet I should be used so, very meet.
How have I been behaved, that he might stick
The smallst opinion on my least misuse?
Re-enter EMILIA with IAGO
What is your pleasure, madam?
How ist with you?
I cannot tell. Those that do teach young babes
Do it with gentle means and easy tasks:
He might have chid me so; for, in good faith,
I am a child to chiding.
Whats the matter, lady?
Alas, Iago, my lord hath so bewhored her.
Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her,
As true hearts cannot bear.
Am I that name, Iago?
What name, fair lady?
Such as she says my lord did say I was.
He calld her whore: a beggar in his drink
Could not have laid such terms upon his callat.
Why did he so?
I do not know; I am sure I am none such.
Do not weep, do not weep. Alas the day!
Hath she forsook so many noble matches,
Her father and her country and her friends,
To be calld whore? would it not make one weep?
It is my wretched fortune.
Beshrew him fort!
How comes this trick upon him?
Nay, heaven doth know.
I will be hangd, if some eternal villain,
Some busy and insinuating rogue,
Some cogging, cozening slave, to get some office,
Have not devised this slander; Ill be hangd else.
Fie, there is no such man; it is impossible.
If any such there be, heaven pardon him!
A halter pardon him! and hell gnaw his bones!
Why should he call her whore? who keeps her company?
What place? what time? what form? what likelihood?
The Moors abused by some most villanous knave,
Some base notorious knave, some scurvy fellow.
O heaven, that such companions thouldst unfold,
And put in every honest hand a whip
To lash the rascals naked through the world
Even from the east to the west!
Speak within door.
O, fie upon them! Some such squire he was
That turnd your wit the seamy side without,
And made you to suspect me with the Moor.
You are a fool; go to.
O good Iago,
What shall I do to win my lord again?
Good friend, go to him; for, by this light of heaven,
I know not how I lost him. Here I kneel:
If eer my will did trespass gainst his love,
Either in discourse of thought or actual deed,
Or that mine eyes, mine ears, or any sense,
Delighted them in any other form;
Or that I do not yet, and ever did.
And ever will--though he do shake me off
To beggarly divorcement--love him dearly,
Comfort forswear me! Unkindness may do much;
And his unkindness may defeat my life,
But never taint my love. I cannot say whore:
It does abhor me now I speak the word;
To do the act that might the addition earn
Not the worlds mass of vanity could make me.
I pray you, be content; tis but his humour:
The business of the state does him offence,
And he does chide with you.
If twere no other--
Tis but so, I warrant.
Trumpets within
Hark, how these instruments summon to supper!
The messengers of Venice stay the meat;
Go in, and weep not; all things shall be well.
Exeunt DESDEMONA and EMILIA
Enter RODERIGO
How now, Roderigo!
I do not find that thou dealest justly with me.
What in the contrary?
Every day thou daffest me with some device, Iago;
and rather, as it seems to me now, keepest from me
all conveniency than suppliest me with the least
advantage of hope. I will indeed no longer endure
it, nor am I yet persuaded to put up in peace what
already I have foolishly suffered.
Will you hear me, Roderigo?
Faith, I have heard too much, for your words and
performances are no kin together.
You charge me most unjustly.
With nought but truth. I have wasted myself out of
my means. The jewels you have had from me to
deliver to Desdemona would half have corrupted a
votarist: you have told me she hath received them
and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden
respect and acquaintance, but I find none.
Well; go to; very well.
Very well! go to! I cannot go to, man; nor tis
not very well: nay, I think it is scurvy, and begin
to find myself fobbed in it.
Very well.
I tell you tis not very well. I will make myself
known to Desdemona: if she will return me my
jewels, I will give over my suit and repent my
unlawful solicitation; if not, assure yourself I
will seek satisfaction of you.
You have said now.
Ay, and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing.
Why, now I see theres mettle in thee, and even from
this instant to build on thee a better opinion than
ever before. Give me thy hand, Roderigo: thou hast
taken against me a most just exception; but yet, I
protest, I have dealt most directly in thy affair.
It hath not appeared.
I grant indeed it hath not appeared, and your
suspicion is not without wit and judgment. But,
Roderigo, if thou hast that in thee indeed, which I
