have greater reason to believe now than ever, I mean
purpose, courage and valour, this night show it: if
thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona,
take me from this world with treachery and devise
engines for my life.
Well, what is it? is it within reason and compass?
Sir, there is especial commission come from Venice
to depute Cassio in Othellos place.
Is that true? why, then Othello and Desdemona
return again to Venice.
O, no; he goes into Mauritania and takes away with
him the fair Desdemona, unless his abode be
lingered here by some accident: wherein none can be
so determinate as the removing of Cassio.
How do you mean, removing of him?
Why, by making him uncapable of Othellos place;
knocking out his brains.
And that you would have me to do?
Ay, if you dare do yourself a profit and a right.
He sups to-night with a harlotry, and thither will I
go to him: he knows not yet of his horrorable
fortune. If you will watch his going thence, which
I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one,
you may take him at your pleasure: I will be near
to second your attempt, and he shall fall between
us. Come, stand not amazed at it, but go along with
me; I will show you such a necessity in his death
that you shall think yourself bound to put it on
him. It is now high suppertime, and the night grows
to waste: about it.
I will hear further reason for this.
And you shall be satisfied.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Another room In the castle.
Enter OTHELLO, LODOVICO, DESDEMONA, EMILIA and Attendants
I do beseech you, sir, trouble yourself no further.
O, pardon me: twill do me good to walk.
Madam, good night; I humbly thank your ladyship.
Your honour is most welcome.
Will you walk, sir?
O,--Desdemona,--
My lord?
Get you to bed on the instant; I will be returned
forthwith: dismiss your attendant there: look it be done.
I will, my lord.
Exeunt OTHELLO, LODOVICO, and Attendants
How goes it now? he looks gentler than he did.
He says he will return incontinent:
He hath commanded me to go to bed,
And bade me to dismiss you.
Dismiss me!
It was his bidding: therefore, good Emilia,.
Give me my nightly wearing, and adieu:
We must not now displease him.
I would you had never seen him!
So would not Imy love doth so approve him,
That even his stubbornness, his cheques, his frowns--
Prithee, unpin me,--have grace and favour in them.
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed.
Alls one. Good faith, how foolish are our minds!
If I do die before thee prithee, shroud me
In one of those same sheets.
Come, come you talk.
My mother had a maid calld Barbara:
She was in love, and he she loved proved mad
And did forsake her: she had a song of willow;
An old thing twas, but it expressd her fortune,
And she died singing it: that song to-night
Will not go from my mind; I have much to do,
But to go hang my head all at one side,
And sing it like poor Barbara. Prithee, dispatch.
Shall I go fetch your night-gown?
No, unpin me here.
This Lodovico is a proper man.
A very handsome man.
He speaks well.
I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot
to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip.
[Singing]  The poor soul sat sighing by a sycamore tree,
Sing all a green willow:
Her hand on her bosom, her head on her knee,
Sing willow, willow, willow:
The fresh streams ran by her, and murmurd her moans;
Sing willow, willow, willow;
Her salt tears fell from her, and softend the stones;
Lay by these:--
Singing
Sing willow, willow, willow;
Prithee, hie thee; hell come anon:--
Singing
Sing all a green willow must be my garland.
Let nobody blame him; his scorn I approve,-
Nay, thats not next.--Hark! who ist that knocks?
Its the wind.
[Singing]  I calld my love false love; but what
said he then?
Sing willow, willow, willow:
If I court moe women, youll couch with moe men!
So, get thee gone; good night Ate eyes do itch;
Doth that bode weeping?
Tis neither here nor there.
I have heard it said so. O, these men, these men!
Dost thou in conscience think,--tell me, Emilia,--
That there be women do abuse their husbands
In such gross kind?
There be some such, no question.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
Why, would not you?
No, by this heavenly light!
Nor I neither by this heavenly light;
I might dot as well i the dark.
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world?
The worlds a huge thing: it is a great price.
For a small vice.
In troth, I think thou wouldst not.
In troth, I think I should; and undot when I had
done. Marry, I would not do such a thing for a
joint-ring, nor for measures of lawn, nor for
gowns, petticoats, nor caps, nor any petty
exhibition; but for the whole world,--why, who would
not make her husband a cuckold to make him a
monarch? I should venture purgatory fort.
Beshrew me, if I would do such a wrong
For the whole world.
Why the wrong is but a wrong i the world: and
having the world for your labour, tis a wrong in your
own world, and you might quickly make it right.
I do not think there is any such woman.
Yes, a dozen; and as many to the vantage as would
store the world they played for.
But I do think it is their husbands faults
If wives do fall: say that they slack their duties,
And pour our treasures into foreign laps,
Or else break out in peevish jealousies,
Throwing restraint upon us; or say they strike us,
Or scant our former having in despite;
Why, we have galls, and though we have some grace,
Yet have we some revenge. Let husbands know
Their wives have sense like them: they see and smell
And have their palates both for sweet and sour,
As husbands have. What is it that they do
When they change us for others? Is it sport?
I think it is: and doth affection breed it?
I think it doth: ist frailty that thus errs?
It is so too: and have not we affections,
Desires for sport, and frailty, as men have?
Then let them use us well: else let them know,
The ills we do, their ills instruct us so.
Good night, good night: heaven me such uses send,
Not to pick bad from bad, but by bad mend!
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Cyprus. A street.
Enter IAGO and RODERIGO
Here, stand behind this bulk; straight will he come:
Wear thy good rapier bare, and put it home:
Quick, quick; fear nothing; Ill be at thy elbow:
It makes us, or it mars us; think on that,
And fix most firm thy resolution.
Be near at hand; I may miscarry int.
Here, at thy hand: be bold, and take thy stand.
Retires
I have no great devotion to the deed;
And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons:
Tis but a man gone. Forth, my sword: he dies.
I have rubbd this young quat almost to the sense,
And he grows angry. Now, whether he kill Cassio,
Or Cassio him, or each do kill the other,
Every way makes my gain: live Roderigo,
He calls me to a restitution large
Of gold and jewels that I bobbd from him,
As gifts to Desdemona;
It must not be: if Cassio do remain,
He hath a daily beauty in his life
That makes me ugly; and, besides, the Moor
May unfold me to him; there stand I in much peril:
No, he must die. But so: I hear him coming.
Enter CASSIO
I know his gait, tis he.--Villain, thou diest!
Makes a pass at CASSIO
That thrust had been mine enemy indeed,
But that my coat is better than thou knowst
I will make proof of thine.
Draws, and wounds RODERIGO
O, I am slain!
IAGO from behind wounds CASSIO in the leg, and exit
I am maimd for ever. Help, ho! murder! murder!
Falls
Enter OTHELLO
The voice of Cassio: Iago keeps his word.
O, villain that I am!
It is even so.
O, help, ho! light! a surgeon!
Tis he:--O brave Iago, honest and just,
That hast such noble sense of thy friends wrong!
Thou teachest me. Minion, your dear lies dead,
And your unblest fate hies: strumpet, I come.
Forth of my heart those charms, thine eyes, are blotted;
Thy bed, lust-staind, shall with lusts blood be spotted.
Exit
Enter LODOVICO and GRATIANO
What, ho! no watch? no passage? murder! murder!
Tis some mischance; the cry is very direful.
O, help!
Hark!
O wretched villain!
Two or three groan: it is a heavy night:
These may be counterfeits: lets thinkt unsafe
To come in to the cry without more help.
Nobody come? then shall I bleed to death.
Hark!
Re-enter IAGO, with a light
Heres one comes in his shirt, with light and weapons.
Whos there? whose noise is this that ones on murder?
We do not know.
Did not you hear a cry?
Here, here! for heavens sake, help me!
Whats the matter?
This is Othellos ancient, as I take it.
The same indeed; a very valiant fellow.
What are you here that cry so grievously?
Iago? O, I am spoild, undone by villains!
Give me some help.
O me, lieutenant! what villains have done this?
I think that one of them is hereabout,
And cannot make away.
O treacherous villains!
What are you there? come in, and give some help.
To LODOVICO and GRATIANO
O, help me here!
Thats one of them.
O murderous slave! O villain!
Stabs RODERIGO
O damnd Iago! O inhuman dog!
Kill men i the dark!--Where be these bloody thieves?--
How silent is this town!--Ho! murder! murder!--
What may you be? are you of good or evil?
As you shall prove us, praise us.
Signior Lodovico?
He, sir.
I cry you mercy. Heres Cassio hurt by villains.
Cassio!
How ist, brother!
My leg is cut in two.
Marry, heaven forbid!
Light, gentlemen; Ill bind it with my shirt.
Enter BIANCA
What is the matter, ho? who ist that cried?
Who ist that cried!
O my dear Cassio! my sweet Cassio! O Cassio,
Cassio, Cassio!
O notable strumpet! Cassio, may you suspect
Who they should be that have thus many led you?
No.
I am to find you thus: I have been to seek you.
Lend me a garter. So. O, for a chair,
To bear him easily hence!
Alas, he faints! O Cassio, Cassio, Cassio!
Gentlemen all, I do suspect this trash
To be a party in this injury.
Patience awhile, good Cassio. Come, come;
Lend me a light. Know we this face or no?
Alas my friend and my dear countryman
Roderigo! no:--yes, sure: O heaven! Roderigo.
What, of Venice?
Even he, sir; did you know him?
Know him! ay.
Signior Gratiano? I cry you gentle pardon;
These bloody accidents must excuse my manners,
That so neglected you.
I am glad to see you.
How do you, Cassio? O, a chair, a chair!
Roderigo!
He, he tis he.
A chair brought in
O, thats well said; the chair!
Some good man bear him carefully from hence;
Ill fetch the generals surgeon.
To BIANCA
For you, mistress,
Save you your labour. He that lies slain
here, Cassio,
Was my dear friend: what malice was between you?
None in the world; nor do I know the man.
[To BIANCA]  What, look you pale? O, bear him out
o the air.
CASSIO and RODERIGO are borne off
Stay you, good gentlemen. Look you pale, mistress?
Do you perceive the gastness of her eye?
Nay, if you stare, we shall hear more anon.
Behold her well; I pray you, look upon her:
Do you see, gentlemen? nay, guiltiness will speak,
Though tongues were out of use.
Enter EMILIA
Las, whats the matter? whats the matter, husband?
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark
By Roderigo and fellows that are scaped:
Hes almost slain, and Roderigo dead.
Alas, good gentleman! alas, good Cassio!
This is the fruit of whoring. Prithee, Emilia,
Go know of Cassio where he suppd to-night.
To BIANCA
What, do you shake at that?
He suppd at my house; but I therefore shake not.
O, did he so? I charge you, go with me.
Fie, fie upon thee, strumpet!
I am no strumpet; but of life as honest
As you that thus abuse me.
As I! foh! fie upon thee!
Kind gentlemen, lets go see poor Cassio dressd.
Come, mistress, you must tells another tale.
Emilia run you to the citadel,
And tell my lord and lady what hath happd.
Will you go on? I pray.
Aside
This is the night
That either makes me or fordoes me quite.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A bedchamber in the castle: DESDEMONA in bed asleep;
a light burning.
Enter OTHELLO
It is the cause, it is the cause, my soul,--
Let me not name it to you, you chaste stars!--
It is the cause. Yet Ill not shed her blood;
Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow,
And smooth as monumental alabaster.
Yet she must die, else shell betray more men.
Put out the light, and then put out the light:
If I quench thee, thou flaming minister,
I can again thy former light restore,
Should I repent me: but once put out thy light,
Thou cunningst pattern of excelling nature,
I know not where is that Promethean heat
That can thy light relume. When I have pluckd the rose,
I cannot give it vital growth again.
It must needs wither: Ill smell it on the tree.
Kissing her
Ah balmy breath, that dost almost persuade
Justice to break her sword! One more, one more.
Be thus when thou art dead, and I will kill thee,
And love thee after. One more, and this the last:
So sweet was neer so fatal. I must weep,
But they are cruel tears: this sorrows heavenly;
It strikes where it doth love. She wakes.
Whos there? Othello?
Ay. Desdemona.
Will you come to bed, my lord?
Have you prayd to-night, Desdemona?
Ay, my lord.
If you bethink yourself of any crime
Unreconciled as yet to heaven and grace,
Solicit for it straight.
Alas, my lord, what do you mean by that?
Well, do it, and be brief; I will walk by:
I would not kill thy unprepared spirit;
No; heaven forfend! I would not kill thy soul.
Talk you of killing?
Ay, I do.
Then heaven
Have mercy on me!
Amen, with all my heart!
If you say so, I hope you will not kill me.
Hum!
And yet I fear you; for you are fatal then
When your eyes roll so: why I should fear I know not,
Since guiltiness I know not; but yet I feel I fear.
Think on thy sins.
They are loves I bear to you.
Ay, and for that thou diest.
That deaths unnatural that kills for loving.
Alas, why gnaw you so your nether lip?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame:
These are portents; but yet I hope, I hope,
They do not point on me.
Peace, and be still!
I will so. Whats the matter?
That handkerchief which I so loved and gave thee
Thou gavest to Cassio.
No, by my life and soul!
Send for the man, and ask him.
Sweet soul, take heed,
Take heed of perjury; thou art on thy deathbed.
Ay, but not yet to die.
Yes, presently:
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin;
For to deny each article with oath
Cannot remove nor choke the strong conception
That I do groan withal. Thou art to die.
Then Lord have mercy on me!
I say, amen.
And have you mercy too! I never did
Offend you in my life; never loved Cassio
But with such general warranty of heaven
As I might love: I never gave him token.
By heaven, I saw my handkerchief ins hand.
O perjured woman! thou dost stone my heart,
And makest me call what I intend to do
A murder, which I thought a sacrifice:
I saw the handkerchief.
He found it then;
I never gave it him: send for him hither;
Let him confess a truth.
He hath confessd.
What, my lord?
That he hath used thee.
How? unlawfully?
Ay.
He will not say so.
No, his mouth is stoppd;
Honest Iago hath taen order fort.
O! my fear interprets: what, is he dead?
Had all his hairs been lives, my great revenge
Had stomach for them all.
Alas! he is betrayd and I undone.
Out, strumpet! weepst thou for him to my face?
O, banish me, my lord, but kill me not!
Down, strumpet!
Kill me to-morrow: let me live to-night!
Nay, if you strive--
But half an hour!
Being done, there is no pause.
But while I say one prayer!
It is too late.
He stifles her
[Within]  My lord , my lord! what, ho! my lord, my lord!
What noise is this? Not dead? not yet quite dead?
I that am cruel am yet merciful;
I would not have thee linger in thy pain: So, so.
[Within]  What, ho! my lord, my lord!
Whos there?
[Within]  O, good my lord, I would speak a word with you!
Yes: tis Emilia. By and by. Shes dead.
Tis like she comes to speak of Cassios death.--
The noise was here. Ha! no more moving?
Still as the grave. Shall she come in? weret good?--
I think she stirs again:--no. Whats best to do?
If she come in, shell sure speak to my wife:
My wife! my wife! what wife? I have no wife.
O insupportable! O heavy hour!
Methinks it should be now a huge eclipse
Of sun and moon, and that the affrighted globe
Should yawn at alteration.
[Within]  I do beseech you
That I may speak with you, O, good my lord!
I had forgot thee: O, come in, Emilia;
Soft; by and by. Let me the curtains draw.
Where art thou?
Unlocks the door
Enter EMILIA
Whats the matter with thee now?
O, my good lord, yonders foul murders done!
What, now?
But now, my lord.
It is the very error of the moon;
She comes more nearer earth than she was wont,
And makes men mad.
Cassio, my lord, hath killd a young Venetian
Calld Roderigo.
Roderigo killd!
And Cassio killd!
No, Cassio is not killd.
Not Cassio killd! then murders out of tune,
And sweet revenge grows harsh.
O, falsely, falsely murderd!
Alas, what cry is that?
That! what?
Out, and alas! that was my ladys voice.
Help! help, ho! help! O lady, speak again!
Sweet Desdemona! O sweet mistress, speak!
A guiltless death I die.
O, who hath done this deed?
Nobody; I myself. Farewell
Commend me to my kind lord: O, farewell!
Dies
Why, how should she be murderd?
Alas, who knows?
You heard her say herself, it was not I.
She said so: I must needs report the truth.
Shes, like a liar, gone to burning hell:
Twas I that killd her.
O, the more angel she,
And you the blacker devil!
She turnd to folly, and she was a whore.
Thou dost belie her, and thou art a devil.
She was false as water.
Thou art rash as fire, to say
That she was false: O, she was heavenly true!
Cassio did top her; ask thy husband else.
O, I were damnd beneath all depth in hell,
But that I did proceed upon just grounds
To this extremity. Thy husband knew it all.
My husband!
Thy husband.
That she was false to wedlock?
Ay, with Cassio. Nay, had she been true,
If heaven would make me such another world
Of one entire and Perfect chrysolite,
Ild not have sold her for it.
My husband!
Ay, twas he that told me first:
An honest man he is, and hates the slime
That sticks on filthy deeds.
My husband!
What needs this iteration, woman? I say thy husband.
O mistress, villany hath made mocks with love,
My husband say that she was false!
He, woman;
I say thy husband: dost understand the word?
My friend, thy husband, honest, honest Iago.
If he say so, may his pernicious soul
Rot half a grain a day! he lies to the heart:
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain.
Ha!
Do thy worst:
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven
Than thou wast worthy her.
Peace, you were best.
Thou hast not half that power to do me harm
As I have to be hurt. O gull! O dolt!
As ignorant as dirt! thou hast done a deed--
I care not for thy sword; Ill make thee known,
Though I lost twenty lives.--Help! help, ho! help!
The Moor hath killd my mistress! Murder! murder!
Enter MONTANO, GRATIANO, IAGO, and others
What is the matter? How now, general!
O, are you come, Iago? you have done well,
That men must lay their murders on your neck.
What is the matter?
Disprove this villain, if thou best a man:
He says thou toldst him that his wife was false:
I know thou didst not, thourt not such a villain:
Speak, for my heart is full.
I told him what I thought, and told no more
Than what he found himself was apt and true.
But did you ever tell him she was false?
I did.
You told a lie, an odious, damned lie;
Upon my soul, a lie, a wicked lie.
She false with Cassio!--did you say with Cassio?
With Cassio, mistress. Go to, charm your tongue.
I will not charm my tongue; I am bound to speak:
My mistress here lies murderd in her bed,--
O heavens forfend!
And your reports have set the murder on.
Nay, stare not, masters: it is true, indeed.
Tis a strange truth.
O monstrous act!
Villany, villany, villany!
I think upont, I think: I smellt: O villany!--
I thought so then:--Ill kill myself for grief:--
O villany, villany!
What, are you mad? I charge you, get you home.
Good gentlemen, let me have leave to speak:
Tis proper I obey him, but not now.
Perchance, Iago, I will neer go home.
O! O! O!
He falls on the bed
Nay, lay thee down and roar;
For thou hast killd the sweetest innocent
That eer did lift up eye.
[Rising]  O, she was foul!
I scarce did know you, uncle: there lies your niece,
Whose breath, indeed, these hands have newly stoppd:
I know this act shows horrible and grim.
Poor Desdemona! I am glad thy fathers dead:
Thy match was mortal to him, and pure grief
Shore his old thread in twain: did he live now,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn,
Yea, curse his better angel from his side,
And fall to reprobation.
Tis pitiful; but yet Iago knows
That she with Cassio hath the act of shame
A thousand times committed; Cassio confessd it:
And she did gratify his amorous works
With that recognizance and pledge of love
Which I first gave her; I saw it in his hand:
It was a handkerchief, an antique token
My father gave my mother.
O heaven! O heavenly powers!
Come, hold your peace.
Twill out, twill out: I peace!
No, I will speak as liberal as the north:
Let heaven and men and devils, let them all,
All, all, cry shame against me, yet Ill speak.
Be wise, and get you home.
I will not.
IAGO offers to stab EMILIA
Fie!
Your sword upon a woman?
O thou dull Moor! that handkerchief thou speakst of
I found by fortune and did give my husband;
For often, with a solemn earnestness,
More than indeed belongd to such a trifle,
He beggd of me to steal it.
Villanous whore!
She give it Cassio! no, alas! I found it,
And I did givet my husband.
Filth, thou liest!
By heaven, I do not, I do not, gentlemen.
O murderous coxcomb! what should such a fool
Do with so good a woman?
Are there no stones in heaven
But what serve for the thunder?--Precious villain!
He runs at IAGO  IAGO, from behind, stabs EMILIA, and exit
The woman falls; sure, he hath killd his wife.
Ay, ay: O, lay me by my mistress side.
Hes gone, but his wifes killd.
Tis a notorious villain. Take you this weapon,
Which I have here recoverd from the Moor:
Come, guard the door without; let him not pass,
But kill him rather. Ill after that same villain,
For tis a damned slave.
Exeunt MONTANO and GRATIANO
I am not valiant neither,
But ever puny whipster gets my sword:
But why should honour outlive honesty?
Let it go all.
What did thy song bode, lady?
Hark, canst thou hear me? I will play the swan.
And die in music.
Singing
Willow, willow, willow,--
Moor, she was chaste; she loved thee, cruel Moor;
So come my soul to bliss, as I speak true;
So speaking as I think, I die, I die.
Dies
I have another weapon in this chamber;
It is a sword of Spain, the ice-brooks temper:--
O, here it is. Uncle, I must come forth.
[Within]  If thou attempt it, it will cost thee dear:
Thou hast no weapon, and perforce must suffer.
Look in upon me then and speak with me,
Or, naked as I am, I will assault thee.
Re-enter GRATIANO
What is the matter?
Behold, I have a weapon;
A better never did itself sustain
Upon a soldiers thigh: I have seen the day,
That, with this little arm and this good sword,
I have made my way through more impediments
Than twenty times your stop: but, O vain boast!
Who can control his fate? tis not so now.
Be not afraid, though you do see me weapond;
Here is my journeys end, here is my butt,
And very sea-mark of my utmost sail.
Do you go back dismayd? tis a lost fear;
Man but a rush against Othellos breast,
And he retires. Where should Othello go?
Now, how dost thou look now? O ill-starrd wench!
Pale as thy smock! when we shall meet at compt,
This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven,
And fiends will snatch at it. Cold, cold, my girl!
Even like thy chastity. O cursed slave!
Whip me, ye devils,
From the possession of this heavenly sight!
Blow me about in winds! roast me in sulphur!
Wash me in steep-down gulfs of liquid fire!
O Desdemona! Desdemona! dead!
Oh! Oh! Oh!
Enter LODOVICO. MONTANO, CASSIO carried in a chair, and Officers with IAGO, prisoner
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man?
Thats he that was Othello: here I am.
Where is that viper? bring the villain forth.
I look down towards his feet; but thats a fable.
If that thou best a devil, I cannot kill thee.
Wounds IAGO
Wrench his sword from him.
I bleed, sir; but not killd.
I am not sorry neither: Ild have thee live;
For, in my sense, tis happiness to die.
O thou Othello, thou wert once so good,
Falln in the practise of a damned slave,
What shall be said to thee?
Why, any thing:
An honourable murderer, if you will;
For nought I did in hate, but all in honour.
This wretch hath part confessd his villany:
Did you and he consent in Cassios death?
Ay.
Dear general, I never gave you cause.
I do believe it, and I ask your pardon.
Will you, I pray, demand that demi-devil
Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body?
Demand me nothing: what you know, you know:
From this time forth I never will speak word.
What, not to pray?
Torments will ope your lips.
Well, thou dost best.
Sir, you shall understand what hath befalln,
Which, as I think, you know not. Here is a letter
Found in the pocket of the slain Roderigo;
And here another: the one of them imports
The death of Cassio to be undertook
By Roderigo.
O villain!
Most heathenish and most gross!
Now heres another discontented paper,
Found in his pocket too; and this, it seems,
Roderigo meant to have sent this damned villain;
But that belike Iago in the interim
Came in and satisfied him.
O the pernicious caitiff!
How came you, Cassio, by that handkerchief
That was my wifes?
I found it in my chamber:
And he himself confessd but even now
That there he droppd it for a special purpose
Which wrought to his desire.
O fool! fool! fool!
There is besides in Roderigos letter,
How he upbraids Iago, that he made him
Brave me upon the watch; whereon it came
That I was cast: and even but now he spake,
After long seeming dead, Iago hurt him,
Iago set him on.
You must forsake this room, and go with us:
Your power and your command is taken off,
And Cassio rules in Cyprus. For this slave,
If there be any cunning cruelty
That can torment him much and hold him long,
It shall be his. You shall close prisoner rest,
Till that the nature of your fault be known
To the Venetian state. Come, bring him away.
Soft you; a word or two before you go.
I have done the state some service, and they knowt.
No more of that. I pray you, in your letters,
When you shall these unlucky deeds relate,
Speak of me as I am; nothing extenuate,
Nor set down aught in malice: then must you speak
Of one that loved not wisely but too well;
Of one not easily jealous, but being wrought
Perplexd in the extreme; of one whose hand,
Like the base Indian, threw a pearl away
Richer than all his tribe; of one whose subdued eyes,
Albeit unused to the melting mood,
Drop tears as fast as the Arabian trees
Their medicinal gum. Set you down this;
And say besides, that in Aleppo once,
Where a malignant and a turband Turk
Beat a Venetian and traduced the state,
I took by the throat the circumcised dog,
And smote him, thus.
Stabs himself
O bloody period!
All thats spoke is marrd.
I kissd thee ere I killd thee: no way but this;
Killing myself, to die upon a kiss.
Falls on the bed, and dies
This did I fear, but thought he had no weapon;
For he was great of heart.
[To IAGO]  O Spartan dog,
More fell than anguish, hunger, or the sea!
Look on the tragic loading of this bed;
This is thy work: the object poisons sight;
Let it be hid. Gratiano, keep the house,
And seize upon the fortunes of the Moor,
For they succeed on you. To you, lord governor,
Remains the censure of this hellish villain;
The time, the place, the torture: O, enforce it!
Myself will straight aboard: and to the state
This heavy act with heavy heart relate.
Exeunt
ACT I
PROLOGUE
Enter GOWER
Before the palace of Antioch
To sing a song that old was sung,
From ashes ancient Gower is come;
Assuming mans infirmities,
To glad your ear, and please your eyes.
It hath been sung at festivals,
On ember-eves and holy-ales;
And lords and ladies in their lives
Have read it for restoratives:
The purchase is to make men glorious;
Et bonum quo antiquius, eo melius.
If you, born in these latter times,
When wits more ripe, accept my rhymes.
And that to hear an old man sing
May to your wishes pleasure bring
I life would wish, and that I might
Waste it for you, like taper-light.
This Antioch, then, Antiochus the Great
Built up, this city, for his chiefest seat:
The fairest in all Syria,
I tell you what mine authors say:
This king unto him took a fere,
Who died and left a female heir,
So buxom, blithe, and full of face,
As heaven had lent her all his grace;
With whom the father liking took,
And her to incest did provoke:
Bad child; worse father! to entice his own
To evil should be done by none:
But custom what they did begin
Was with long use account no sin.
The beauty of this sinful dame
Made many princes thither frame,
To seek her as a bed-fellow,
In marriage-pleasures play-fellow:
Which to prevent he made a law,
To keep her still, and men in awe,
That whoso askd her for his wife,
His riddle told not, lost his life:
So for her many a wight did die,
As yon grim looks do testify.
What now ensues, to the judgment of your eye
I give, my cause who best can justify.
Exit
SCENE I. Antioch. A room in the palace.
Enter ANTIOCHUS, Prince PERICLES, and followers
Young prince of Tyre, you have at large received
The danger of the task you undertake.
I have, Antiochus, and, with a soul
Emboldend with the glory of her praise,
Think death no hazard in this enterprise.
Bring in our daughter, clothed like a bride,
For the embracements even of Jove himself;
At whose conception, till Lucina reignd,
Nature this dowry gave, to glad her presence,
The senate-house of planets all did sit,
To knit in her their best perfections.
Music. Enter the Daughter of ANTIOCHUS
See where she comes, apparelld like the spring,
Graces her subjects, and her thoughts the king
Of every virtue gives renown to men!
Her face the book of praises, where is read
Nothing but curious pleasures, as from thence
Sorrow were ever razed and testy wrath
Could never be her mild companion.
You gods that made me man, and sway in love,
That have inflamed desire in my breast
To taste the fruit of yon celestial tree,
Or die in the adventure, be my helps,
As I am son and servant to your will,
To compass such a boundless happiness!
Prince Pericles,--
That would be son to great Antiochus.
Before thee stands this fair Hesperides,
With golden fruit, but dangerous to be touchd;
For death-like dragons here affright thee hard:
Her face, like heaven, enticeth thee to view
Her countless glory, which desert must gain;
And which, without desert, because thine eye
Presumes to reach, all thy whole heap must die.
Yon sometimes famous princes, like thyself,
Drawn by report, adventurous by desire,
Tell thee, with speechless tongues and semblance pale,
That without covering, save yon field of stars,
Here they stand martyrs, slain in Cupids wars;
And with dead cheeks advise thee to desist
For going on deaths net, whom none resist.
Antiochus, I thank thee, who hath taught
My frail mortality to know itself,
And by those fearful objects to prepare
This body, like to them, to what I must;
For death rememberd should be like a mirror,
Who tells us lifes but breath, to trust it error.
Ill make my will then, and, as sick men do
Who know the world, see heaven, but, feeling woe,
Gripe not at earthly joys as erst they did;
So I bequeath a happy peace to you
And all good men, as every prince should do;
My riches to the earth from whence they came;
But my unspotted fire of love to you.
To the Daughter of ANTIOCHUS
Thus ready for the way of life or death,
I wait the sharpest blow, Antiochus.
Scorning advice, read the conclusion then:
Which read and not expounded, tis decreed,
As these before thee thou thyself shalt bleed.
Of all sayd yet, mayst thou prove prosperous!
Of all sayd yet, I wish thee happiness!
Like a bold champion, I assume the lists,
Nor ask advice of any other thought
But faithfulness and courage.
He reads the riddle
I am no viper, yet I feed
On mothers flesh which did me breed.
I sought a husband, in which labour
I found that kindness in a father:
Hes father, son, and husband mild;
I mother, wife, and yet his child.
How they may be, and yet in two,
As you will live, resolve it you.
Sharp physic is the last: but, O you powers
That give heaven countless eyes to view mens acts,
Why cloud they not their sights perpetually,
If this be true, which makes me pale to read it?
Fair glass of light, I loved you, and could still,
Takes hold of the hand of the Daughter of ANTIOCHUS
Were not this glorious casket stored with ill:
But I must tell you, now my thoughts revolt
For hes no man on whom perfections wait
That, knowing sin within, will touch the gate.
You are a fair viol, and your sense the strings;
Who, fingerd to make man his lawful music,
Would draw heaven down, and all the gods, to hearken:
But being playd upon before your time,
Hell only danceth at so harsh a chime.
Good sooth, I care not for you.
Prince Pericles, touch not, upon thy life.
For thats an article within our law,
As dangerous as the rest. Your times expired:
Either expound now, or receive your sentence.
Great king,
Few love to hear the sins they love to act;
Twould braid yourself too near for me to tell it.
Who has a book of all that monarchs do,
Hes more secure to keep it shut than shown:
For vice repeated is like the wandering wind.
Blows dust in others eyes, to spread itself;
And yet the end of all is bought thus dear,
The breath is gone, and the sore eyes see clear:
To stop the air would hurt them. The blind mole casts
Coppd hills towards heaven, to tell the earth is throngd
By mans oppression; and the poor worm doth die fort.
Kings are earths gods; in vice their laws
their will;
And if Jove stray, who dares say Jove doth ill?
It is enough you know; and it is fit,
What being more known grows worse, to smother it.
All love the womb that their first being bred,
Then give my tongue like leave to love my head.
[Aside]  Heaven, that I had thy head! he has found
the meaning:
But I will gloze with him.--Young prince of Tyre,
Though by the tenor of our strict edict,
Your exposition misinterpreting,
We might proceed to cancel of your days;
Yet hope, succeeding from so fair a tree
As your fair self, doth tune us otherwise:
Forty days longer we do respite you;
If by which time our secret be undone,
This mercy shows well joy in such a son:
And until then your entertain shall be
As doth befit our honour and your worth.
Exeunt all but PERICLES
How courtesy would seem to cover sin,
When what is done is like an hypocrite,
The which is good in nothing but in sight!
If it be true that I interpret false,
Then were it certain you were not so bad
As with foul incest to abuse your soul;
Where now youre both a father and a son,
By your untimely claspings with your child,
Which pleasure fits an husband, not a father;
And she an eater of her mothers flesh,
By the defiling of her parents bed;
And both like serpents are, who though they feed
On sweetest flowers, yet they poison breed.
Antioch, farewell! for wisdom sees, those men
Blush not in actions blacker than the night,
Will shun no course to keep them from the light.
One sin, I know, another doth provoke;
Murders as near to lust as flame to smoke:
Poison and treason are the hands of sin,
Ay, and the targets, to put off the shame:
Then, lest my lie be croppd to keep you clear,
By flight Ill shun the danger which I fear.
Exit
Re-enter ANTIOCHUS
He hath found the meaning, for which we mean
To have his head.
He must not live to trumpet forth my infamy,
Nor tell the world Antiochus doth sin
In such a loathed manner;
And therefore instantly this prince must die:
For by his fall my honour must keep high.
Who attends us there?
Enter THALIARD
Doth your highness call?
Thaliard,
You are of our chamber, and our mind partakes
Her private actions to your secrecy;
And for your faithfulness we will advance you.
Thaliard, behold, heres poison, and heres gold;
We hate the prince of Tyre, and thou must kill him:
It fits thee not to ask the reason why,
Because we bid it. Say, is it done?
My lord,
Tis done.
Enough.
Enter a Messenger
Let your breath cool yourself, telling your haste.
My lord, prince Pericles is fled.
Exit
As thou
Wilt live, fly after: and like an arrow shot
From a well-experienced archer hits the mark
His eye doth level at, so thou neer return
Unless thou say Prince Pericles is dead.
My lord,
If I can get him within my pistols length,
Ill make him sure enough: so, farewell to your highness.
Thaliard, adieu!
Exit THALIARD
Till Pericles be dead,
My heart can lend no succor to my head.
Exit
