SCENE II. Tyre. A room in the palace.
Enter PERICLES
[To Lords without]  Let none disturb us.--Why should
this change of thoughts,
The sad companion, dull-eyed melancholy,
Be my so used a guest as not an hour,
In the days glorious walk, or peaceful night,
The tomb where grief should sleep, can breed me quiet?
Here pleasures court mine eyes, and mine eyes shun them,
And danger, which I feard, is at Antioch,
Whose aim seems far too short to hit me here:
Yet neither pleasures art can joy my spirits,
Nor yet the others distance comfort me.
Then it is thus: the passions of the mind,
That have their first conception by mis-dread,
Have after-nourishment and life by care;
And what was first but fear what might be done,
Grows elder now and cares it be not done.
And so with me: the great Antiochus,
Gainst whom I am too little to contend,
Since hes so great can make his will his act,
Will think me speaking, though I swear to silence;
Nor boots it me to say I honour him.
If he suspect I may dishonour him:
And what may make him blush in being known,
Hell stop the course by which it might be known;
With hostile forces hell oerspread the land,
And with the ostent of war will look so huge,
Amazement shall drive courage from the state;
Our men be vanquishd ere they do resist,
And subjects punishd that neer thought offence:
Which care of them, not pity of myself,
Who am no more but as the tops of trees,
Which fence the roots they grow by and defend them,
Makes both my body pine and soul to languish,
And punish that before that he would punish.
Enter HELICANUS, with other Lords
Joy and all comfort in your sacred breast!
And keep your mind, till you return to us,
Peaceful and comfortable!
Peace, peace, and give experience tongue.
They do abuse the king that flatter him:
For flattery is the bellows blows up sin;
The thing which is flatterd, but a spark,
To which that blast gives heat and stronger glowing;
Whereas reproof, obedient and in order,
Fits kings, as they are men, for they may err.
When Signior Sooth here does proclaim a peace,
He flatters you, makes war upon your life.
Prince, pardon me, or strike me, if you please;
I cannot be much lower than my knees.
All leave us else; but let your cares oerlook
What shipping and what ladings in our haven,
And then return to us.
Exeunt Lords
Helicanus, thou
Hast moved us: what seest thou in our looks?
An angry brow, dread lord.
If there be such a dart in princes frowns,
How durst thy tongue move anger to our face?
How dare the plants look up to heaven, from whence
They have their nourishment?
Thou knowst I have power
To take thy life from thee.
[Kneeling]
I have ground the axe myself;
Do you but strike the blow.
Rise, prithee, rise.
Sit down: thou art no flatterer:
I thank thee for it; and heaven forbid
That kings should let their ears hear their
faults hid!
Fit counsellor and servant for a prince,
Who by thy wisdom makest a prince thy servant,
What wouldst thou have me do?
To bear with patience
Such griefs as you yourself do lay upon yourself.
Thou speakst like a physician, Helicanus,
That ministerst a potion unto me
That thou wouldst tremble to receive thyself.
Attend me, then: I went to Antioch,
Where as thou knowst, against the face of death,
I sought the purchase of a glorious beauty.
From whence an issue I might propagate,
Are arms to princes, and bring joys to subjects.
Her face was to mine eye beyond all wonder;
The rest--hark in thine ear--as black as incest:
Which by my knowledge found, the sinful father
Seemd not to strike, but smooth: but thou
knowst this,
Tis time to fear when tyrants seem to kiss.
Such fear so grew in me, I hither fled,
Under the covering of a careful night,
Who seemd my good protector; and, being here,
Bethought me what was past, what might succeed.
I knew him tyrannous; and tyrants fears
Decrease not, but grow faster than the years:
And should he doubt it, as no doubt he doth,
That I should open to the listening air
How many worthy princes bloods were shed,
To keep his bed of blackness unlaid ope,
To lop that doubt, hell fill this land with arms,
And make pretence of wrong that I have done him:
When all, for mine, if I may call offence,
Must feel wars blow, who spares not innocence:
Which love to all, of which thyself art one,
Who now reprovest me for it,--
Alas, sir!
Drew sleep out of mine eyes, blood from my cheeks,
Musings into my mind, with thousand doubts
How I might stop this tempest ere it came;
And finding little comfort to relieve them,
I thought it princely charity to grieve them.
Well, my lord, since you have given me leave to speak.
Freely will I speak. Antiochus you fear,
And justly too, I think, you fear the tyrant,
Who either by public war or private treason
Will take away your life.
Therefore, my lord, go travel for a while,
Till that his rage and anger be forgot,
Or till the Destinies do cut his thread of life.
Your rule direct to any; if to me.
Day serves not light more faithful than Ill be.
I do not doubt thy faith;
But should he wrong my liberties in my absence?
Well mingle our bloods together in the earth,
From whence we had our being and our birth.
Tyre, I now look from thee then, and to Tarsus
Intend my travel, where Ill hear from thee;
And by whose letters Ill dispose myself.
The care I had and have of subjects good
On thee I lay whose wisdoms strength can bear it.
Ill take thy word for faith, not ask thine oath:
Who shuns not to break one will sure crack both:
But in our orbs well live so round and safe,
That time of both this truth shall neer convince,
Thou showdst a subjects shine, I a true prince.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Tyre. An ante-chamber in the palace.
Enter THALIARD
So, this is Tyre, and this the court. Here must I
kill King Pericles; and if I do it not, I am sure to
be hanged at home: tis dangerous. Well, I perceive
he was a wise fellow, and had good discretion, that,
being bid to ask what he would of the king, desired
he might know none of his secrets: now do I see he
had some reason fort; for if a king bid a man be a
villain, hes bound by the indenture of his oath to
be one! Hush! here come the lords of Tyre.
Enter HELICANUS and ESCANES, with other Lords of Tyre
You shall not need, my fellow peers of Tyre,
Further to question me of your kings departure:
His seald commission, left in trust with me,
Doth speak sufficiently hes gone to travel.
[Aside]  How! the king gone!
If further yet you will be satisfied,
Why, as it were unlicensed of your loves,
He would depart, Ill give some light unto you.
Being at Antioch--
[Aside]          What from Antioch?
Royal Antiochus--on what cause I know not--
Took some displeasure at him; at least he judged so:
And doubting lest that he had errd or sinnd,
To show his sorrow, held correct himself;
So puts himself unto the shipmans toil,
With whom each minute threatens life or death.
[Aside]  Well, I perceive
I shall not be hangd now, although I would;
But since hes gone, the kings seas must please:
He scaped the land, to perish at the sea.
Ill present myself. Peace to the lords of Tyre!
Lord Thaliard from Antiochus is welcome.
From him I come
With message unto princely Pericles;
But since my landing I have understood
Your lord has betook himself to unknown travels,
My message must return from whence it came.
We have no reason to desire it,
Commended to our master, not to us:
Yet, ere you shall depart, this we desire,
As friends to Antioch, we may feast in Tyre.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Tarsus. A room in the Governors house.
Enter CLEON, the governor of Tarsus, with DIONYZA, and others
My Dionyza, shall we rest us here,
And by relating tales of others griefs,
See if twill teach us to forget our own?
That were to blow at fire in hope to quench it;
For who digs hills because they do aspire
Throws down one mountain to cast up a higher.
O my distressed lord, even such our griefs are;
Here theyre but felt, and seen with mischiefs eyes,
But like to groves, being toppd, they higher rise.
O Dionyza,
Who wanteth food, and will not say he wants it,
Or can conceal his hunger till he famish?
Our tongues and sorrows do sound deep
Our woes into the air; our eyes do weep,
Till tongues fetch breath that may proclaim them louder;
That, if heaven slumber while their creatures want,
They may awake their helps to comfort them.
Ill then discourse our woes, felt several years,
And wanting breath to speak help me with tears.
Ill do my best, sir.
This Tarsus, oer which I have the government,
A city on whom plenty held full hand,
For riches strewd herself even in the streets;
Whose towers bore heads so high they kissd the clouds,
And strangers neer beheld but wondered at;
Whose men and dames so jetted and adornd,
Like one anothers glass to trim them by:
Their tables were stored full, to glad the sight,
And not so much to feed on as delight;
All poverty was scornd, and pride so great,
The name of help grew odious to repeat.
O, tis too true.
But see what heaven can do! By this our change,
These mouths, who but of late, earth, sea, and air,
Were all too little to content and please,
Although they gave their creatures in abundance,
As houses are defiled for want of use,
They are now starved for want of exercise:
Those palates who, not yet two summers younger,
Must have inventions to delight the taste,
Would now be glad of bread, and beg for it:
Those mothers who, to nousle up their babes,
Thought nought too curious, are ready now
To eat those little darlings whom they loved.
So sharp are hungers teeth, that man and wife
Draw lots who first shall die to lengthen life:
Here stands a lord, and there a lady weeping;
Here many sink, yet those which see them fall
Have scarce strength left to give them burial.
Is not this true?
Our cheeks and hollow eyes do witness it.
O, let those cities that of plentys cup
And her prosperities so largely taste,
With their superfluous riots, hear these tears!
The misery of Tarsus may be theirs.
Enter a Lord
Wheres the lord governor?
Here.
Speak out thy sorrows which thou bringst in haste,
For comfort is too far for us to expect.
We have descried, upon our neighbouring shore,
A portly sail of ships make hitherward.
I thought as much.
One sorrow never comes but brings an heir,
That may succeed as his inheritor;
And so in ours: some neighbouring nation,
Taking advantage of our misery,
Hath stuffd these hollow vessels with their power,
To beat us down, the which are down already;
And make a conquest of unhappy me,
Whereas no glorys got to overcome.
Thats the least fear; for, by the semblance
Of their white flags displayd, they bring us peace,
And come to us as favourers, not as foes.
Thou speakst like hims untutord to repeat:
Who makes the fairest show means most deceit.
But bring they what they will and what they can,
What need we fear?
The grounds the lowest, and we are half way there.
Go tell their general we attend him here,
To know for what he comes, and whence he comes,
And what he craves.
I go, my lord.
Exit
Welcome is peace, if he on peace consist;
If wars, we are unable to resist.
Enter PERICLES with Attendants
Lord governor, for so we hear you are,
Let not our ships and number of our men
Be like a beacon fired to amaze your eyes.
We have heard your miseries as far as Tyre,
And seen the desolation of your streets:
Nor come we to add sorrow to your tears,
But to relieve them of their heavy load;
And these our ships, you happily may think
Are like the Trojan horse was stuffd within
With bloody veins, expecting overthrow,
Are stored with corn to make your needy bread,
And give them life whom hunger starved half dead.
The gods of Greece protect you!
And well pray for you.
Arise, I pray you, rise:
We do not look for reverence, but to love,
And harbourage for ourself, our ships, and men.
The which when any shall not gratify,
Or pay you with unthankfulness in thought,
Be it our wives, our children, or ourselves,
The curse of heaven and men succeed their evils!
Till when,--the which I hope shall neer be seen,--
Your grace is welcome to our town and us.
Which welcome well accept; feast here awhile,
Until our stars that frown lend us a smile.
Exeunt
ACT II
Enter GOWER
Here have you seen a mighty king
His child, I wis, to incest bring;
A better prince and benign lord,
That will prove awful both in deed and word.
Be quiet then as men should be,
Till he hath passd necessity.
Ill show you those in troubles reign,
Losing a mite, a mountain gain.
The good in conversation,
To whom I give my benison,
Is still at Tarsus, where each man
Thinks all is writ he speken can;
And, to remember what he does,
Build his statue to make him glorious:
But tidings to the contrary
Are brought your eyes; what need speak I?
DUMB SHOW.
Enter at one door PERICLES talking with CLEON; all  the train with them. Enter at another door a  Gentleman, with a letter to PERICLES; PERICLES  shows the letter to CLEON; gives the Messenger a  reward, and knights him. Exit PERICLES at one door, and CLEON at another
Good Helicane, that stayd at home,
Not to eat honey like a drone
From others labours; for though he strive
To killen bad, keep good alive;
And to fulfil his prince desire,
Sends word of all that haps in Tyre:
How Thaliard came full bent with sin
And had intent to murder him;
And that in Tarsus was not best
Longer for him to make his rest.
He, doing so, put forth to seas,
Where when men been, theres seldom ease;
For now the wind begins to blow;
Thunder above and deeps below
Make such unquiet, that the ship
Should house him safe is wreckd and split;
And he, good prince, having all lost,
By waves from coast to coast is tost:
All perishen of man, of pelf,
Ne aught escapen but himself;
Till fortune, tired with doing bad,
Threw him ashore, to give him glad:
And here he comes. What shall be next,
Pardon old Gower,--this longs the text.
Exit
SCENE I. Pentapolis. An open place by the sea-side.
Enter PERICLES, wet
Yet cease your ire, you angry stars of heaven!
Wind, rain, and thunder, remember, earthly man
Is but a substance that must yield to you;
And I, as fits my nature, do obey you:
Alas, the sea hath cast me on the rocks,
Washd me from shore to shore, and left me breath
Nothing to think on but ensuing death:
Let it suffice the greatness of your powers
To have bereft a prince of all his fortunes;
And having thrown him from your watery grave,
Here to have death in peace is all hell crave.
Enter three FISHERMEN
What, ho, Pilch!
Ha, come and bring away the nets!
What, Patch-breech, I say!
What say you, master?
Look how thou stirrest now! come away, or Ill
fetch thee with a wanion.
Faith, master, I am thinking of the poor men that
were cast away before us even now.
Alas, poor souls, it grieved my heart to hear what
pitiful cries they made to us to help them, when,
well-a-day, we could scarce help ourselves.
Nay, master, said not I as much when I saw the
porpus how he bounced and tumbled? they say
theyre half fish, half flesh: a plague on them,
they neer come but I look to be washed. Master, I
marvel how the fishes live in the sea.
Why, as men do a-land; the great ones eat up the
little ones: I can compare our rich misers to
nothing so fitly as to a whale; a plays and
tumbles, driving the poor fry before him, and at
last devours them all at a mouthful: such whales
have I heard on o the land, who never leave gaping
till theyve swallowed the whole parish, church,
steeple, bells, and all.
[Aside]  A pretty moral.
But, master, if I had been the sexton, I would have
been that day in the belfry.
Why, man?
Because he should have swallowed me too: and when I
had been in his belly, I would have kept such a
jangling of the bells, that he should never have
left, till he cast bells, steeple, church, and
parish up again. But if the good King Simonides
were of my mind,--
[Aside]  Simonides!
We would purge the land of these drones, that rob
the bee of her honey.
[Aside]  How from the finny subject of the sea
These fishers tell the infirmities of men;
And from their watery empire recollect
All that may men approve or men detect!
Peace be at your labour, honest fishermen.
Honest! good fellow, whats that? If it be a day
fits you, search out of the calendar, and nobody
look after it.
May see the sea hath cast upon your coast.
What a drunken knave was the sea to cast thee in our
way!
A man whom both the waters and the wind,
In that vast tennis-court, have made the ball
For them to play upon, entreats you pity him:
He asks of you, that never used to beg.
No, friend, cannot you beg? Heres them in our
country Greece gets more with begging than we can do
with working.
Canst thou catch any fishes, then?
I never practised it.
Nay, then thou wilt starve, sure; for heres nothing
to be got now-a-days, unless thou canst fish fort.
What I have been I have forgot to know;
But what I am, want teaches me to think on:
A man throngd up with cold: my veins are chill,
And have no more of life than may suffice
To give my tongue that heat to ask your help;
Which if you shall refuse, when I am dead,
For that I am a man, pray see me buried.
Die quoth-a? Now gods forbid! I have a gown here;
come, put it on; keep thee warm. Now, afore me, a
handsome fellow! Come, thou shalt go home, and
well have flesh for holidays, fish for
fasting-days, and moreoer puddings and flap-jacks,
and thou shalt be welcome.
I thank you, sir.
Hark you, my friend; you said you could not beg.
I did but crave.
But crave! Then Ill turn craver too, and so I
shall scape whipping.
Why, are all your beggars whipped, then?
O, not all, my friend, not all; for if all your
beggars were whipped, I would wish no better office
than to be beadle. But, master, Ill go draw up the
net.
Exit with Third Fisherman
[Aside]  How well this honest mirth becomes their labour!
Hark you, sir, do you know where ye are?
Not well.
Why, Ill tell you: this is called Pentapolis, and
our king the good Simonides.
The good King Simonides, do you call him.
Ay, sir; and he deserves so to be called for his
peaceable reign and good government.
He is a happy king, since he gains from his subjects
the name of good by his government. How far is his
court distant from this shore?
Marry, sir, half a days journey: and Ill tell
you, he hath a fair daughter, and to-morrow is her
birth-day; and there are princes and knights come
from all parts of the world to just and tourney for her love.
Were my fortunes equal to my desires, I could wish
to make one there.
O, sir, things must be as they may; and what a man
cannot get, he may lawfully deal for--his wifes soul.
Re-enter Second and Third Fishermen, drawing up a net
Help, master, help! heres a fish hangs in the net,
like a poor mans right in the law; twill hardly
come out. Ha! bots ont, tis come at last, and
tis turned to a rusty armour.
An armour, friends! I pray you, let me see it.
Thanks, fortune, yet, that, after all my crosses,
Thou givest me somewhat to repair myself;
And though it was mine own, part of my heritage,
Which my dead father did bequeath to me.
With this strict charge, even as he left his life,
Keep it, my Pericles; it hath been a shield
Twixt me and death;--and pointed to this brace;--
For that it saved me, keep it; in like necessity--
The which the gods protect thee from!--may
defend thee.
It kept where I kept, I so dearly loved it;
Till the rough seas, that spare not any man,
Took it in rage, though calmd have givent again:
I thank thee fort: my shipwreck nows no ill,
Since I have here my fathers gift ins will.
What mean you, sir?
To beg of you, kind friends, this coat of worth,
For it was sometime target to a king;
I know it by this mark. He loved me dearly,
And for his sake I wish the having of it;
And that yould guide me to your sovereigns court,
Where with it I may appear a gentleman;
And if that ever my low fortunes better,
Ill pay your bounties; till then rest your debtor.
Why, wilt thou tourney for the lady?
Ill show the virtue I have borne in arms.
Why, do e take it, and the gods give thee good ont!
Ay, but hark you, my friend; twas we that made up
this garment through the rough seams of the waters:
there are certain condolements, certain vails. I
hope, sir, if you thrive, youll remember from
whence you had it.
Believe t, I will.
By your furtherance I am clothed in steel;
And, spite of all the rapture of the sea,
This jewel holds his building on my arm:
Unto thy value I will mount myself
Upon a courser, whose delightful steps
Shall make the gazer joy to see him tread.
Only, my friend, I yet am unprovided
Of a pair of bases.
Well sure provide: thou shalt have my best gown to
make thee a pair; and Ill bring thee to the court myself.
Then honour be but a goal to my will,
This day Ill rise, or else add ill to ill.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. A public way or platform leading to the
lists. A pavilion by the side of it for the
reception of King, Princess, Lords,  and c.
Enter SIMONIDES, THAISA, Lords, and Attendants
Are the knights ready to begin the triumph?
They are, my liege;
And stay your coming to present themselves.
Return them, we are ready; and our daughter,
In honour of whose birth these triumphs are,
Sits here, like beautys child, whom nature gat
For men to see, and seeing wonder at.
Exit a Lord
It pleaseth you, my royal father, to express
My commendations great, whose merits less.
Its fit it should be so; for princes are
A model which heaven makes like to itself:
As jewels lose their glory if neglected,
So princes their renowns if not respected.
Tis now your honour, daughter, to explain
The labour of each knight in his device.
Which, to preserve mine honour, Ill perform.
Enter a Knight; he passes over, and his Squire presents his shield to the Princess
Who is the first that doth prefer himself?
A knight of Sparta, my renowned father;
And the device he bears upon his shield
Is a black Ethiope reaching at the sun
The word, Lux tua vita mihi.
He loves you well that holds his life of you.
The Second Knight passes over
Who is the second that presents himself?
A prince of Macedon, my royal father;
And the device he bears upon his shield
Is an armd knight thats conquerd by a lady;
The motto thus, in Spanish, Piu por dulzura que por fuerza.
The Third Knight passes over
And whats the third?
The third of Antioch;
And his device, a wreath of chivalry;
The word, Me pompae provexit apex.
The Fourth Knight passes over
What is the fourth?
A burning torch thats turned upside down;
The word, Quod me alit, me extinguit.
Which shows that beauty hath his power and will,
Which can as well inflame as it can kill.
The Fifth Knight passes over
The fifth, an hand environed with clouds,
Holding out gold thats by the touchstone tried;
The motto thus, Sic spectanda fides.
The Sixth Knight, PERICLES, passes over
And whats
The sixth and last, the which the knight himself
With such a graceful courtesy deliverd?
He seems to be a stranger; but his present is
A witherd branch, thats only green at top;
The motto, In hac spe vivo.
A pretty moral;
From the dejected state wherein he is,
He hopes by you his fortunes yet may flourish.
He had need mean better than his outward show
Can any way speak in his just commend;
For by his rusty outside he appears
To have practised more the whipstock than the lance.
He well may be a stranger, for he comes
To an honourd triumph strangely furnished.
And on set purpose let his armour rust
Until this day, to scour it in the dust.
Opinions but a fool, that makes us scan
The outward habit by the inward man.
But stay, the knights are coming: we will withdraw
Into the gallery.
Exeunt
Great shouts within and all cry The mean knight!
SCENE III. The same. A hall of state: a banquet prepared.
Enter SIMONIDES, THAISA, Lords, Attendants, and Knights, from tilting
Knights,
To say youre welcome were superfluous.
To place upon the volume of your deeds,
As in a title-page, your worth in arms,
Were more than you expect, or more thans fit,
Since every worth in show commends itself.
Prepare for mirth, for mirth becomes a feast:
You are princes and my guests.
But you, my knight and guest;
To whom this wreath of victory I give,
And crown you king of this days happiness.
Tis more by fortune, lady, than by merit.
Call it by what you will, the day is yours;
And here, I hope, is none that envies it.
In framing an artist, art hath thus decreed,
To make some good, but others to exceed;
And you are her labourd scholar. Come, queen o
the feast,--
For, daughter, so you are,--here take your place:
Marshal the rest, as they deserve their grace.
We are honourd much by good Simonides.
Your presence glads our days: honour we love;
For who hates honour hates the gods above.
Sir, yonder is your place.
Some other is more fit.
Contend not, sir; for we are gentlemen
That neither in our hearts nor outward eyes
Envy the great nor do the low despise.
You are right courteous knights.
Sit, sir, sit.
By Jove, I wonder, that is king of thoughts,
These cates resist me, she but thought upon.
By Juno, that is queen of marriage,
All viands that I eat do seem unsavoury.
Wishing him my meat. Sure, hes a gallant gentleman.
Hes but a country gentleman;
Has done no more than other knights have done;
Has broken a staff or so; so let it pass.
To me he seems like diamond to glass.
Yon kings to me like to my fathers picture,
Which tells me in that glory once he was;
Had princes sit, like stars, about his throne,
And he the sun, for them to reverence;
None that beheld him, but, like lesser lights,
Did vail their crowns to his supremacy:
Where now his sons like a glow-worm in the night,
The which hath fire in darkness, none in light:
Whereby I see that Times the king of men,
Hes both their parent, and he is their grave,
And gives them what he will, not what they crave.
What, are you merry, knights?
Who can be other in this royal presence?
Here, with a cup thats stored unto the brim,--
As you do love, fill to your mistress lips,--
We drink this health to you.
We thank your grace.
Yet pause awhile:
Yon knight doth sit too melancholy,
As if the entertainment in our court
Had not a show might countervail his worth.
Note it not you, Thaisa?
What is it
To me, my father?
O, attend, my daughter:
Princes in this should live like gods above,
Who freely give to every one that comes
To honour them:
And princes not doin g so are like to gnats,
Which make a sound, but killd are wonderd at.
Therefore to make his entrance more sweet,
Here, say we drink this standing-bowl of wine to him.
Alas, my father, it befits not me
Unto a stranger knight to be so bold:
He may my proffer take for an offence,
Since men take womens gifts for impudence.
How!
Do as I bid you, or youll move me else.
[Aside]  Now, by the gods, he could not please me better.
And furthermore tell him, we desire to know of him,
Of whence he is, his name and parentage.
The king my father, sir, has drunk to you.
I thank him.
Wishing it so much blood unto your life.
I thank both him and you, and pledge him freely.
And further he desires to know of you,
Of whence you are, your name and parentage.
A gentleman of Tyre; my name, Pericles;
My education been in arts and arms;
Who, looking for adventures in the world,
Was by the rough seas reft of ships and men,
And after shipwreck driven upon this shore.
He thanks your grace; names himself Pericles,
A gentleman of Tyre,
Who only by misfortune of the seas
Bereft of ships and men, cast on this shore.
Now, by the gods, I pity his misfortune,
And will awake him from his melancholy.
Come, gentlemen, we sit too long on trifles,
And waste the time, which looks for other revels.
Even in your armours, as you are addressd,
Will very well become a soldiers dance.
I will not have excuse, with saying this
Loud music is too harsh for ladies heads,
Since they love men in arms as well as beds.
The Knights dance
So, this was well askd,twas so well performd.
Come, sir;
Here is a lady that wants breathing too:
And I have heard, you knights of Tyre
Are excellent in making ladies trip;
And that their measures are as excellent.
In those that practise them they are, my lord.
O, thats as much as you would be denied
Of your fair courtesy.
The Knights and Ladies dance
Unclasp, unclasp:
Thanks, gentlemen, to all; all have done well.
To PERICLES
But you the best. Pages and lights, to conduct
These knights unto their several lodgings!
To PERICLES
Yours, sir,
We have given order to be next our own.
I am at your graces pleasure.
Princes, it is too late to talk of love;
And thats the mark I know you level at:
Therefore each one betake him to his rest;
To-morrow all for speeding do their best.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Tyre. A room in the Governors house.
Enter HELICANUS and ESCANES
No, Escanes, know this of me,
Antiochus from incest lived not free:
For which, the most high gods not minding longer
To withhold the vengeance that they had in store,
Due to this heinous capital offence,
Even in the height and pride of all his glory,
When he was seated in a chariot
Of an inestimable value, and his daughter with him,
A fire from heaven came and shrivelld up
Their bodies, even to loathing; for they so stunk,
That all those eyes adored them ere their fall
Scorn now their hand should give them burial.
Twas very strange.
And yet but justice; for though
This king were great, his greatness was no guard
To bar heavens shaft, but sin had his reward.
Tis very true.
Enter two or three Lords
See, not a man in private conference
Or council has respect with him but he.
It shall no longer grieve without reproof.
And cursed be he that will not second it.
Follow me, then. Lord Helicane, a word.
With me? and welcome: happy day, my lords.
Know that our griefs are risen to the top,
And now at length they overflow their banks.
Your griefs! for what? wrong not your prince you love.
Wrong not yourself, then, noble Helicane;
But if the prince do live, let us salute him,
Or know what grounds made happy by his breath.
If in the world he live, well seek him out;
If in his grave he rest, well find him there;
And be resolved he lives to govern us,
Or dead, gives cause to mourn his funeral,
And leave us to our free election.
Whose death indeeds the strongest in our censure:
And knowing this kingdom is without a head,--
Like goodly buildings left without a roof
Soon fall to ruin,--your noble self,
That best know how to rule and how to reign,
We thus submit unto,--our sovereign.
Live, noble Helicane!
For honours cause, forbear your suffrages:
If that you love Prince Pericles, forbear.
Take I your wish, I leap into the seas,
Wheres hourly trouble for a minutes ease.
A twelvemonth longer, let me entreat you to
Forbear the absence of your king:
If in which time expired, he not return,
I shall with aged patience bear your yoke.
But if I cannot win you to this love,
Go search like nobles, like noble subjects,
And in your search spend your adventurous worth;
Whom if you find, and win unto return,
You shall like diamonds sit about his crown.
To wisdom hes a fool that will not yield;
And since Lord Helicane enjoineth us,
We with our travels will endeavour us.
Then you love us, we you, and well clasp hands:
When peers thus knit, a kingdom ever stands.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Pentapolis. A room in the palace.
Enter SIMONIDES, reading a letter, at one door: the Knights meet him
Good morrow to the good Simonides.
Knights, from my daughter this I let you know,
That for this twelvemonth shell not undertake
A married life.
Her reason to herself is only known,
Which yet from her by no means can I get.
May we not get access to her, my lord?
Faith, by no means; she has so strictly tied
Her to her chamber, that tis impossible.
One twelve moons more shell wear Dianas livery;
This by the eye of Cynthia hath she vowd
And on her virgin honour will not break it.
Loath to bid farewell, we take our leaves.
Exeunt Knights
So,
They are well dispatchd; now to my daughters letter:
She tells me here, shed wed the stranger knight,
Or never more to view nor day nor light.
Tis well, mistress; your choice agrees with mine;
I like that well: nay, how absolute shes int,
Not minding whether I dislike or no!
Well, I do commend her choice;
And will no longer have it be delayd.
Soft! here he comes: I must dissemble it.
Enter PERICLES
All fortune to the good Simonides!
To you as much, sir! I am beholding to you
For your sweet music this last night: I do
Protest my ears were never better fed
With such delightful pleasing harmony.
It is your graces pleasure to commend;
Not my desert.
Sir, you are musics master.
The worst of all her scholars, my good lord.
Let me ask you one thing:
What do you think of my daughter, sir?
A most virtuous princess.
And she is fair too, is she not?
As a fair day in summer, wondrous fair.
Sir, my daughter thinks very well of you;
Ay, so well, that you must be her master,
And she will be your scholar: therefore look to it.
I am unworthy for her schoolmaster.
She thinks not so; peruse this writing else.
[Aside]  Whats here?
A letter, that she loves the knight of Tyre!
Tis the kings subtlety to have my life.
O, seek not to entrap me, gracious lord,
A stranger and distressed gentleman,
That never aimd so high to love your daughter,
But bent all offices to honour her.
Thou hast bewitchd my daughter, and thou art
A villain.
By the gods, I have not:
Never did thought of mine levy offence;
Nor never did my actions yet commence
A deed might gain her love or your displeasure.
Traitor, thou liest.
Traitor!
Ay, traitor.
Even in his throat--unless it be the king--
That calls me traitor, I return the lie.
[Aside]  Now, by the gods, I do applaud his courage.
My actions are as noble as my thoughts,
That never relishd of a base descent.
I came unto your court for honours cause,
And not to be a rebel to her state;
And he that otherwise accounts of me,
This sword shall prove hes honours enemy.
No?
Here comes my daughter, she can witness it.
Enter THAISA
Then, as you are as virtuous as fair,
Resolve your angry father, if my tongue
Did ere solicit, or my hand subscribe
To any syllable that made love to you.
Why, sir, say if you had,
Who takes offence at that would make me glad?
Yea, mistress, are you so peremptory?
Aside
I am glad ont with all my heart.--
Ill tame you; Ill bring you in subjection.
Will you, not having my consent,
Bestow your love and your affections
Upon a stranger?
Aside
who, for aught I know,
May be, nor can I think the contrary,
As great in blood as I myself.--
Therefore hear you, mistress; either frame
Your will to mine,--and you, sir, hear you,
Either be ruled by me, or I will make you--
Man and wife:
Nay, come, your hands and lips must seal it too:
And being joind, Ill thus your hopes destroy;
And for a further grief,--God give you joy!--
What, are you both pleased?
Yes, if you love me, sir.
Even as my life, or blood that fosters it.
What, are you both agreed?
Yes, if it please your majesty.
It pleaseth me so well, that I will see you wed;
And then with what haste you can get you to bed.
Exeunt
ACT III
Enter GOWER
Now sleep y-slaked hath the rout;
No din but snores the house about,
Made louder by the oer-fed breast
Of this most pompous marriage-feast.
The cat, with eyne of burning coal,
Now crouches fore the mouses hole;
And crickets sing at the ovens mouth,
Eer the blither for their drouth.
Hymen hath brought the bride to bed.
Where, by the loss of maidenhead,
A babe is moulded. Be attent,
And time that is so briefly spent
With your fine fancies quaintly eche:
Whats dumb in show Ill plain with speech.
DUMB SHOW.
Enter, PERICLES and SIMONIDES at one door, with  Attendants; a Messenger meets them, kneels, and  gives PERICLES a letter: PERICLES shows it  SIMONIDES; the Lords kneel to him. Then enter  THAISA with child, with LYCHORIDA a nurse. The  KING shows her the letter; she rejoices: she and  PERICLES takes leave of her father, and depart with  LYCHORIDA and their Attendants. Then exeunt SIMONIDES and the rest
By many a dern and painful perch
Of Pericles the careful search,
By the four opposing coigns
Which the world together joins,
Is made with all due diligence
That horse and sail and high expense
Can stead the quest. At last from Tyre,
Fame answering the most strange inquire,
To the court of King Simonides
Are letters brought, the tenor these:
Antiochus and his daughter dead;
The men of Tyrus on the head
Of Helicanus would set on
The crown of Tyre, but he will none:
The mutiny he there hastes t oppress;
Says to em, if King Pericles
Come not home in twice six moons,
He, obedient to their dooms,
Will take the crown. The sum of this,
Brought hither to Pentapolis,
Y-ravished the regions round,
And every one with claps can sound,
Our heir-apparent is a king!
Who dreamd, who thought of such a thing?
Brief, he must hence depart to Tyre:
His queen with child makes her desire--
Which who shall cross?--along to go:
Omit we all their dole and woe:
Lychorida, her nurse, she takes,
And so to sea. Their vessel shakes
On Neptunes billow; half the flood
Hath their keel cut: but fortunes mood
Varies again; the grisly north
Disgorges such a tempest forth,
That, as a duck for life that dives,
So up and down the poor ship drives:
The lady shrieks, and well-a-near
Does fall in travail with her fear:
And what ensues in this fell storm
Shall for itself itself perform.
I nill relate, action may
Conveniently the rest convey;
Which might not what by me is told.
In your imagination hold
This stage the ship, upon whose deck
The sea-tost Pericles appears to speak.
Exit
SCENE I:
Enter PERICLES, on shipboard
Thou god of this great vast, rebuke these surges,
Which wash both heaven and hell; and thou, that hast
Upon the winds command, bind them in brass,
Having calld them from the deep! O, still
Thy deafening, dreadful thunders; gently quench
Thy nimble, sulphurous flashes! O, how, Lychorida,
How does my queen? Thou stormest venomously;
Wilt thou spit all thyself? The seamans whistle
Is as a whisper in the ears of death,
Unheard. Lychorida!--Lucina, O
Divinest patroness, and midwife gentle
To those that cry by night, convey thy deity
Aboard our dancing boat; make swift the pangs
Of my queens travails!
Enter LYCHORIDA, with an Infant
Now, Lychorida!
Here is a thing too young for such a place,
Who, if it had conceit, would die, as I
Am like to do: take in your arms this piece
Of your dead queen.
How, how, Lychorida!
Patience, good sir; do not assist the storm.
Heres all that is left living of your queen,
A little daughter: for the sake of it,
Be manly, and take comfort.
O you gods!
Why do you make us love your goodly gifts,
And snatch them straight away? We here below
Recall not what we give, and therein may
Use honour with you.
Patience, good sir,
Even for this charge.
Now, mild may be thy life!
For a more blustrous birth had never babe:
Quiet and gentle thy conditions! for
Thou art the rudeliest welcome to this world
That ever was princes child. Happy what follows!
Thou hast as chiding a nativity
As fire, air, water, earth, and heaven can make,
To herald thee from the womb: even at the first
Thy loss is more than can thy portage quit,
With all thou canst find here. Now, the good gods
Throw their best eyes upont!
Enter two Sailors
What courage, sir? God save you!
Courage enough: I do not fear the flaw;
It hath done to me the worst. Yet, for the love
Of this poor infant, this fresh-new sea-farer,
I would it would be quiet.
Slack the bolins there! Thou wilt not, wilt thou?
