Blow, and split thyself.
But sea-room, an the brine and cloudy billow kiss
the moon, I care not.
Sir, your queen must overboard: the sea works high,
the wind is loud, and will not lie till the ship be
cleared of the dead.
Thats your superstition.
Pardon us, sir; with us at sea it hath been still
observed: and we are strong in custom. Therefore
briefly yield her; for she must overboard straight.
As you think meet. Most wretched queen!
Here she lies, sir.
A terrible childbed hast thou had, my dear;
No light, no fire: the unfriendly elements
Forgot thee utterly: nor have I time
To give thee hallowd to thy grave, but straight
Must cast thee, scarcely coffind, in the ooze;
Where, for a monument upon thy bones,
And eer-remaining lamps, the belching whale
And humming water must oerwhelm thy corpse,
Lying with simple shells. O Lychorida,
Bid Nestor bring me spices, ink and paper,
My casket and my jewels; and bid Nicander
Bring me the satin coffer: lay the babe
Upon the pillow: hie thee, whiles I say
A priestly farewell to her: suddenly, woman.
Exit LYCHORIDA
Sir, we have a chest beneath the hatches, caulked
and bitumed ready.
I thank thee. Mariner, say what coast is this?
We are near Tarsus.
Thither, gentle mariner.
Alter thy course for Tyre. When canst thou reach it?
By break of day, if the wind cease.
O, make for Tarsus!
There will I visit Cleon, for the babe
Cannot hold out to Tyrus: there Ill leave it
At careful nursing. Go thy ways, good mariner:
Ill bring the body presently.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Ephesus. A room in CERIMONs house.
Enter CERIMON, with a Servant, and some Persons who have been shipwrecked
Philemon, ho!
Enter PHILEMON
Doth my lord call?
Get fire and meat for these poor men:
T has been a turbulent and stormy night.
I have been in many; but such a night as this,
Till now, I neer endured.
Your master will be dead ere you return;
Theres nothing can be ministerd to nature
That can recover him.
To PHILEMON
Give this to the pothecary,
And tell me how it works.
Exeunt all but CERIMON
Enter two Gentlemen
Good morrow.
Good morrow to your lordship.
Gentlemen,
Why do you stir so early?
Sir,
Our lodgings, standing bleak upon the sea,
Shook as the earth did quake;
The very principals did seem to rend,
And all-to topple: pure surprise and fear
Made me to quit the house.
That is the cause we trouble you so early;
Tis not our husbandry.
O, you say well.
But I much marvel that your lordship, having
Rich tire about you, should at these early hours
Shake off the golden slumber of repose.
Tis most strange,
Nature should be so conversant with pain,
Being thereto not compelld.
I hold it ever,
Virtue and cunning were endowments greater
Than nobleness and riches: careless heirs
May the two latter darken and expend;
But immortality attends the former.
Making a man a god. Tis known, I ever
Have studied physic, through which secret art,
By turning oer authorities, I have,
Together with my practise, made familiar
To me and to my aid the blest infusions
That dwell in vegetives, in metals, stones;
And I can speak of the disturbances
That nature works, and of her cures; which doth give me
A more content in course of true delight
Than to be thirsty after tottering honour,
Or tie my treasure up in silken bags,
To please the fool and death.
Your honour has through Ephesus pourd forth
Your charity, and hundreds call themselves
Your creatures, who by you have been restored:
And not your knowledge, your personal pain, but even
Your purse, still open, hath built Lord Cerimon
Such strong renown as time shall neer decay.
Enter two or three Servants with a chest
So; lift there.
What is that?
Sir, even now
Did the sea toss upon our shore this chest:
Tis of some wreck.
Set t down, lets look upont.
Tis like a coffin, sir.
Whateer it be,
Tis wondrous heavy. Wrench it open straight:
If the seas stomach be oercharged with gold,
Tis a good constraint of fortune it belches upon us.
Tis so, my lord.
How close tis caulkd and bitumed!
Did the sea cast it up?
I never saw so huge a billow, sir,
As tossd it upon shore.
Wrench it open;
Soft! it smells most sweetly in my sense.
A delicate odour.
As ever hit my nostril. So, up with it.
O you most potent gods! whats here? a corse!
Most strange!
Shrouded in cloth of state; balmd and entreasured
With full bags of spices! A passport too!
Apollo, perfect me in the characters!
Reads from a scroll
Here I give to understand,
If eer this coffin drive a-land,
I, King Pericles, have lost
This queen, worth all our mundane cost.
Who finds her, give her burying;
She was the daughter of a king:
Besides this treasure for a fee,
The gods requite his charity!
If thou livest, Pericles, thou hast a heart
That even cracks for woe! This chanced tonight.
Most likely, sir.
Nay, certainly to-night;
For look how fresh she looks! They were too rough
That threw her in the sea. Make a fire within:
Fetch hither all my boxes in my closet.
Exit a Servant
Death may usurp on nature many hours,
And yet the fire of life kindle again
The oerpressd spirits. I heard of an Egyptian
That had nine hours lien dead,
Who was by good appliance recovered.
Re-enter a Servant, with boxes, napkins, and fire
Well said, well said; the fire and cloths.
The rough and woeful music that we have,
Cause it to sound, beseech you.
The viol once more: how thou stirrst, thou block!
The music there!--I pray you, give her air.
Gentlemen.
This queen will live: nature awakes; a warmth
Breathes out of her: she hath not been entranced
Above five hours: see how she gins to blow
Into lifes flower again!
The heavens,
Through you, increase our wonder and set up
Your fame forever.
She is alive; behold,
Her eyelids, cases to those heavenly jewels
Which Pericles hath lost,
Begin to part their fringes of bright gold;
The diamonds of a most praised water
Do appear, to make the world twice rich. Live,
And make us weep to hear your fate, fair creature,
Rare as you seem to be.
She moves
O dear Diana,
Where am I? Wheres my lord? What world is this?
Is not this strange?
Most rare.
Hush, my gentle neighbours!
Lend me your hands; to the next chamber bear her.
Get linen: now this matter must be lookd to,
For her relapse is mortal. Come, come;
And AEsculapius guide us!
Exeunt, carrying her away
SCENE III. Tarsus. A room in CLEONs house.
Enter PERICLES, CLEON, DIONYZA, and LYCHORIDA with MARINA in her arms
Most honourd Cleon, I must needs be gone;
My twelve months are expired, and Tyrus stands
In a litigious peace. You, and your lady,
Take from my heart all thankfulness! The gods
Make up the rest upon you!
Your shafts of fortune, though they hurt you mortally,
Yet glance full wanderingly on us.
O your sweet queen!
That the strict fates had pleased you had brought her hither,
To have blessd mine eyes with her!
We cannot but obey
The powers above us. Could I rage and roar
As doth the sea she lies in, yet the end
Must be as tis. My gentle babe Marina, whom,
For she was born at sea, I have named so, here
I charge your charity withal, leaving her
The infant of your care; beseeching you
To give her princely training, that she may be
Mannerd as she is born.
Fear not, my lord, but think
Your grace, that fed my country with your corn,
For which the peoples prayers still fall upon you,
Must in your child be thought on. If neglection
Should therein make me vile, the common body,
By you relieved, would force me to my duty:
But if to that my nature need a spur,
The gods revenge it upon me and mine,
To the end of generation!
I believe you;
Your honour and your goodness teach me tot,
Without your vows. Till she be married, madam,
By bright Diana, whom we honour, all
Unscissord shall this hair of mine remain,
Though I show ill int. So I take my leave.
Good madam, make me blessed in your care
In bringing up my child.
I have one myself,
Who shall not be more dear to my respect
Than yours, my lord.
Madam, my thanks and prayers.
Well bring your grace een to the edge o the shore,
Then give you up to the maskd Neptune and
The gentlest winds of heaven.
I will embrace
Your offer. Come, dearest madam. O, no tears,
Lychorida, no tears:
Look to your little mistress, on whose grace
You may depend hereafter. Come, my lord.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Ephesus. A room in CERIMONs house.
Enter CERIMON and THAISA
Madam, this letter, and some certain jewels,
Lay with you in your coffer: which are now
At your command. Know you the character?
It is my lords.
That I was shippd at sea, I well remember,
Even on my eaning time; but whether there
Deliverd, by the holy gods,
I cannot rightly say. But since King Pericles,
My wedded lord, I neer shall see again,
A vestal livery will I take me to,
And never more have joy.
Madam, if this you purpose as ye speak,
Dianas temple is not distant far,
Where you may abide till your date expire.
Moreover, if you please, a niece of mine
Shall there attend you.
My recompense is thanks, thats all;
Yet my good will is great, though the gift small.
Exeunt
ACT IV
Enter GOWER
Imagine Pericles arrived at Tyre,
Welcomed and settled to his own desire.
His woeful queen we leave at Ephesus,
Unto Diana there a votaress.
Now to Marina bend your mind,
Whom our fast-growing scene must find
At Tarsus, and by Cleon traind
In music, letters; who hath gaind
Of education all the grace,
Which makes her both the heart and place
Of general wonder. But, alack,
That monster envy, oft the wrack
Of earned praise, Marinas life
Seeks to take off by treasons knife.
And in this kind hath our Cleon
One daughter, and a wench full grown,
Even ripe for marriage-rite; this maid
Hight Philoten: and it is said
For certain in our story, she
Would ever with Marina be:
Bet when she weaved the sleided silk
With fingers long, small, white as milk;
Or when she would with sharp needle wound
The cambric, which she made more sound
By hurting it; or when to the lute
She sung, and made the night-bird mute,
That still records with moan; or when
She would with rich and constant pen
Vail to her mistress Dian; still
This Philoten contends in skill
With absolute Marina: so
With the dove of Paphos might the crow
Vie feathers white. Marina gets
All praises, which are paid as debts,
And not as given. This so darks
In Philoten all graceful marks,
That Cleons wife, with envy rare,
A present murderer does prepare
For good Marina, that her daughter
Might stand peerless by this slaughter.
The sooner her vile thoughts to stead,
Lychorida, our nurse, is dead:
And cursed Dionyza hath
The pregnant instrument of wrath
Prest for this blow. The unborn event
I do commend to your content:
Only I carry winged time
Post on the lame feet of my rhyme;
Which never could I so convey,
Unless your thoughts went on my way.
Dionyza does appear,
With Leonine, a murderer.
Exit
SCENE I. Tarsus. An open place near the sea-shore.
Enter DIONYZA and LEONINE
Thy oath remember; thou hast sworn to dot:
Tis but a blow, which never shall be known.
Thou canst not do a thing in the world so soon,
To yield thee so much profit. Let not conscience,
Which is but cold, inflaming love i thy bosom,
Inflame too nicely; nor let pity, which
Even women have cast off, melt thee, but be
A soldier to thy purpose.
I will dot; but yet she is a goodly creature.
The fitter, then, the gods should have her. Here
she comes weeping for her only mistress death.
Thou art resolved?
I am resolved.
Enter MARINA, with a basket of flowers
No, I will rob Tellus of her weed,
To strew thy green with flowers: the yellows, blues,
The purple violets, and marigolds,
Shall as a carpet hang upon thy grave,
While summer-days do last. Ay me! poor maid,
Born in a tempest, when my mother died,
This world to me is like a lasting storm,
Whirring me from my friends.
How now, Marina! why do you keep alone?
How chance my daughter is not with you? Do not
Consume your blood with sorrowing: you have
A nurse of me. Lord, how your favours changed
With this unprofitable woe!
Come, give me your flowers, ere the sea mar it.
Walk with Leonine; the air is quick there,
And it pierces and sharpens the stomach. Come,
Leonine, take her by the arm, walk with her.
No, I pray you;
Ill not bereave you of your servant.
Come, come;
I love the king your father, and yourself,
With more than foreign heart. We every day
Expect him here: when he shall come and find
Our paragon to all reports thus blasted,
He will repent the breadth of his great voyage;
Blame both my lord and me, that we have taken
No care to your best courses. Go, I pray you,
Walk, and be cheerful once again; reserve
That excellent complexion, which did steal
The eyes of young and old. Care not for me
I can go home alone.
Well, I will go;
But yet I have no desire to it.
Come, come, I know tis good for you.
Walk half an hour, Leonine, at the least:
Remember what I have said.
I warrant you, madam.
Ill leave you, my sweet lady, for a while:
Pray, walk softly, do not heat your blood:
What! I must have a care of you.
My thanks, sweet madam.
Exit DIONYZA
Is this wind westerly that blows?
South-west.
When I was born, the wind was north.
Wast so?
My father, as nurse said, did never fear,
But cried Good seaman! to the sailors, galling
His kingly hands, haling ropes;
And, clasping to the mast, endured a sea
That almost burst the deck.
When was this?
When I was born:
Never was waves nor wind more violent;
And from the ladder-tackle washes off
A canvas-climber. Ha! says one, wilt out?
And with a dropping industry they skip
From stem to stern: the boatswain whistles, and
The master calls, and trebles their confusion.
Come, say your prayers.
What mean you?
If you require a little space for prayer,
I grant it: pray; but be not tedious,
For the gods are quick of ear, and I am sworn
To do my work with haste.
Why will you kill me?
To satisfy my lady.
Why would she have me killd?
Now, as I can remember, by my troth,
I never did her hurt in all my life:
I never spake bad word, nor did ill turn
To any living creature: believe me, la,
I never killd a mouse, nor hurt a fly:
I trod upon a worm against my will,
But I wept for it. How have I offended,
Wherein my death might yield her any profit,
Or my life imply her any danger?
My commission
Is not to reason of the deed, but do it.
You will not dot for all the world, I hope.
You are well favourd, and your looks foreshow
You have a gentle heart. I saw you lately,
When you caught hurt in parting two that fought:
Good sooth, it showd well in you: do so now:
Your lady seeks my life; come you between,
And save poor me, the weaker.
I am sworn,
And will dispatch.
He seizes her
Enter Pirates
Hold, villain!
LEONINE runs away
A prize! a prize!
Half-part, mates, half-part.
Come, lets have her aboard suddenly.
Exeunt Pirates with MARINA
Re-enter LEONINE
These roguing thieves serve the great pirate Valdes;
And they have seized Marina. Let her go:
Theres no hope she will return. Ill swear
shes dead,
And thrown into the sea. But Ill see further:
Perhaps they will but please themselves upon her,
Not carry her aboard. If she remain,
Whom they have ravishd must by me be slain.
Exit
SCENE II. Mytilene. A room in a brothel.
Enter Pandar, Bawd, and BOULT
Boult!
Sir?
Search the market narrowly; Mytilene is full of
gallants. We lost too much money this mart by being
too wenchless.
We were never so much out of creatures. We have but
poor three, and they can do no more than they can
do; and they with continual action are even as good as rotten.
Therefore lets have fresh ones, whateer we pay for
them. If there be not a conscience to be used in
every trade, we shall never prosper.
Thou sayest true: tis not our bringing up of poor
bastards,--as, I think, I have brought up some eleven--
Ay, to eleven; and brought them down again. But
shall I search the market?
What else, man? The stuff we have, a strong wind
will blow it to pieces, they are so pitifully sodden.
Thou sayest true; theyre too unwholesome, o
conscience. The poor Transylvanian is dead, that
lay with the little baggage.
Ay, she quickly pooped him; she made him roast-meat
for worms. But Ill go search the market.
Exit
Three or four thousand chequins were as pretty a
proportion to live quietly, and so give over.
Why to give over, I pray you? is it a shame to get
when we are old?
O, our credit comes not in like the commodity, nor
the commodity wages not with the danger: therefore,
if in our youths we could pick up some pretty
estate, twere not amiss to keep our door hatched.
Besides, the sore terms we stand upon with the gods
will be strong with us for giving over.
Come, other sorts offend as well as we.
As well as we! ay, and better too; we offend worse.
Neither is our profession any trade; its no
calling. But here comes Boult.
Re-enter BOULT, with the Pirates and MARINA
[To MARINA]  Come your ways. My masters, you say
shes a virgin?
O, sir, we doubt it not.
Master, I have gone through for this piece, you see:
if you like her, so; if not, I have lost my earnest.
Boult, has she any qualities?
She has a good face, speaks well, and has excellent
good clothes: theres no further necessity of
qualities can make her be refused.
Whats her price, Boult?
I cannot be bated one doit of a thousand pieces.
Well, follow me, my masters, you shall have your
money presently. Wife, take her in; instruct her
what she has to do, that she may not be raw in her
entertainment.
Exeunt Pandar and Pirates
Boult, take you the marks of her, the colour of her
hair, complexion, height, age, with warrant of her
virginity; and cry He that will give most shall
have her first. Such a maidenhead were no cheap
thing, if men were as they have been. Get this done
as I command you.
Performance shall follow.
Exit
Alack that Leonine was so slack, so slow!
He should have struck, not spoke; or that these pirates,
Not enough barbarous, had not oerboard thrown me
For to seek my mother!
Why lament you, pretty one?
That I am pretty.
Come, the gods have done their part in you.
I accuse them not.
You are light into my hands, where you are like to live.
The more my fault
To scape his hands where I was like to die.
Ay, and you shall live in pleasure.
No.
Yes, indeed shall you, and taste gentlemen of all
fashions: you shall fare well; you shall have the
difference of all complexions. What! do you stop your ears?
Are you a woman?
What would you have me be, an I be not a woman?
An honest woman, or not a woman.
Marry, whip thee, gosling: I think I shall have
something to do with you. Come, youre a young
foolish sapling, and must be bowed as I would have
you.
The gods defend me!
If it please the gods to defend you by men, then men
must comfort you, men must feed you, men must stir
you up. Boults returned.
Re-enter BOULT
Now, sir, hast thou cried her through the market?
I have cried her almost to the number of her hairs;
I have drawn her picture with my voice.
And I prithee tell me, how dost thou find the
inclination of the people, especially of the younger sort?
Faith, they listened to me as they would have
hearkened to their fathers testament. There was a
Spaniards mouth so watered, that he went to bed to
her very description.
We shall have him here to-morrow with his best ruff on.
To-night, to-night. But, mistress, do you know the
French knight that cowers i the hams?
Who, Monsieur Veroles?
Ay, he: he offered to cut a caper at the
proclamation; but he made a groan at it, and swore
he would see her to-morrow.
Well, well; as for him, he brought his disease
hither: here he does but repair it. I know he will
come in our shadow, to scatter his crowns in the
sun.
Well, if we had of every nation a traveller, we
should lodge them with this sign.
[To MARINA]  Pray you, come hither awhile. You
have fortunes coming upon you. Mark me: you must
seem to do that fearfully which you commit
willingly, despise profit where you have most gain.
To weep that you live as ye do makes pity in your
lovers: seldom but that pity begets you a good
opinion, and that opinion a mere profit.
I understand you not.
O, take her home, mistress, take her home: these
blushes of hers must be quenched with some present practise.
Thou sayest true, i faith, so they must; for your
bride goes to that with shame which is her way to go
with warrant.
Faith, some do, and some do not. But, mistress, if
I have bargained for the joint,--
Thou mayst cut a morsel off the spit.
I may so.
Who should deny it? Come, young one, I like the
manner of your garments well.
Ay, by my faith, they shall not be changed yet.
Boult, spend thou that in the town: report what a
sojourner we have; youll lose nothing by custom.
When nature flamed this piece, she meant thee a good
turn; therefore say what a paragon she is, and thou
hast the harvest out of thine own report.
I warrant you, mistress, thunder shall not so awake
the beds of eels as my giving out her beauty stir up
the lewdly-inclined. Ill bring home some to-night.
Come your ways; follow me.
If fires be hot, knives sharp, or waters deep,
Untied I still my virgin knot will keep.
Diana, aid my purpose!
What have we to do with Diana? Pray you, will you go with us?
Exeunt
SCENE III. Tarsus. A room in CLEONs house.
Enter CLEON and DIONYZA
Why, are you foolish? Can it be undone?
O Dionyza, such a piece of slaughter
The sun and moon neer lookd upon!
I think
Youll turn a child again.
Were I chief lord of all this spacious world,
Ild give it to undo the deed. O lady,
Much less in blood than virtue, yet a princess
To equal any single crown o the earth
I the justice of compare! O villain Leonine!
Whom thou hast poisond too:
If thou hadst drunk to him, t had been a kindness
Becoming well thy fact: what canst thou say
When noble Pericles shall demand his child?
That she is dead. Nurses are not the fates,
To foster it, nor ever to preserve.
She died at night; Ill say so. Who can cross it?
Unless you play the pious innocent,
And for an honest attribute cry out
She died by foul play.
O, go to. Well, well,
Of all the faults beneath the heavens, the gods
Do like this worst.
Be one of those that think
The petty wrens of Tarsus will fly hence,
And open this to Pericles. I do shame
To think of what a noble strain you are,
And of how coward a spirit.
To such proceeding
Who ever but his approbation added,
Though not his prime consent, he did not flow
From honourable sources.
Be it so, then:
Yet none does know, but you, how she came dead,
Nor none can know, Leonine being gone.
She did disdain my child, and stood between
Her and her fortunes: none would look on her,
But cast their gazes on Marinas face;
Whilst ours was blurted at and held a malkin
Not worth the time of day. It pierced me through;
And though you call my course unnatural,
You not your child well loving, yet I find
It greets me as an enterprise of kindness
Performd to your sole daughter.
Heavens forgive it!
And as for Pericles,
What should he say? We wept after her hearse,
And yet we mourn: her monument
Is almost finishd, and her epitaphs
In glittering golden characters express
A general praise to her, and care in us
At whose expense tis done.
Thou art like the harpy,
Which, to betray, dost, with thine angels face,
Seize with thine eagles talons.
You are like one that superstitiously
Doth swear to the gods that winter kills the flies:
But yet I know youll do as I advise.
Exeunt
SCENE IV:
Enter GOWER, before the monument of MARINA at Tarsus
Thus time we waste, and longest leagues make short;
Sail seas in cockles, have an wish but fort;
Making, to take your imagination,
From bourn to bourn, region to region.
By you being pardond, we commit no crime
To use one language in each several clime
Where our scenes seem to live. I do beseech you
To learn of me, who stand i the gaps to teach you,
The stages of our story. Pericles
Is now again thwarting the wayward seas,
Attended on by many a lord and knight.
To see his daughter, all his lifes delight.
Old Escanes, whom Helicanus late
Advanced in time to great and high estate,
Is left to govern. Bear you it in mind,
Old Helicanus goes along behind.
Well-sailing ships and bounteous winds have brought
This king to Tarsus,--think his pilot thought;
So with his steerage shall your thoughts grow on,--
To fetch his daughter home, who first is gone.
Like motes and shadows see them move awhile;
Your ears unto your eyes Ill reconcile.
DUMB SHOW.
Enter PERICLES, at one door, with all his train;  CLEON and DIONYZA, at the other. CLEON shows  PERICLES the tomb; whereat PERICLES makes  lamentation, puts on sackcloth, and in a mighty passion departs. Then exeunt CLEON and DIONYZA
See how belief may suffer by foul show!
This borrowd passion stands for true old woe;
And Pericles, in sorrow all devourd,
With sighs shot through, and biggest tears
oershowerd,
Leaves Tarsus and again embarks. He swears
Never to wash his face, nor cut his hairs:
He puts on sackcloth, and to sea. He bears
A tempest, which his mortal vessel tears,
And yet he rides it out. Now please you wit.
The epitaph is for Marina writ
By wicked Dionyza.
Reads the inscription on MARINAs monument
The fairest, sweetst, and best lies here,
Who witherd in her spring of year.
She was of Tyrus the kings daughter,
On whom foul death hath made this slaughter;
Marina was she calld; and at her birth,
Thetis, being proud, swallowd some part o the earth:
Therefore the earth, fearing to be oerflowd,
Hath Thetis birth-child on the heavens bestowd:
Wherefore she does, and swears shell never stint,
Make raging battery upon shores of flint.
No visor does become black villany
So well as soft and tender flattery.
Let Pericles believe his daughters dead,
And bear his courses to be ordered
By Lady Fortune; while our scene must play
His daughters woe and heavy well-a-day
In her unholy service. Patience, then,
And think you now are all in Mytilene.
Exit
SCENE V. Mytilene. A street before the brothel.
Enter, from the brothel, two Gentlemen
Did you ever hear the like?
No, nor never shall do in such a place as this, she
being once gone.
But to have divinity preached there! did you ever
dream of such a thing?
No, no. Come, I am for no more bawdy-houses:
shalls go hear the vestals sing?
Ill do any thing now that is virtuous; but I
am out of the road of rutting for ever.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. The same. A room in the brothel.
Enter Pandar, Bawd, and BOULT
Well, I had rather than twice the worth of her she
had neer come here.
Fie, fie upon her! shes able to freeze the god
Priapus, and undo a whole generation. We must
either get her ravished, or be rid of her. When she
should do for clients her fitment, and do me the
kindness of our profession, she has me her quirks,
her reasons, her master reasons, her prayers, her
knees; that she would make a puritan of the devil,
if he should cheapen a kiss of her.
Faith, I must ravish her, or shell disfurnish us
of all our cavaliers, and make our swearers priests.
Now, the pox upon her green-sickness for me!
Faith, theres no way to be rid ont but by the
way to the pox. Here comes the Lord Lysimachus disguised.
We should have both lord and lown, if the peevish
baggage would but give way to customers.
Enter LYSIMACHUS
How now! How a dozen of virginities?
Now, the gods to-bless your honour!
I am glad to see your honour in good health.
You may so; tis the better for you that your
resorters stand upon sound legs. How now!
wholesome iniquity have you that a man may deal
withal, and defy the surgeon?
We have here one, sir, if she would--but there never
came her like in Mytilene.
If sheld do the deed of darkness, thou wouldst say.
Your honour knows what tis to say well enough.
Well, call forth, call forth.
For flesh and blood, sir, white and red, you shall
see a rose; and she were a rose indeed, if she had but--
What, prithee?
O, sir, I can be modest.
That dignifies the renown of a bawd, no less than it
gives a good report to a number to be chaste.
Exit BOULT
Here comes that which grows to the stalk; never
plucked yet, I can assure you.
Re-enter BOULT with MARINA
Is she not a fair creature?
Faith, she would serve after a long voyage at sea.
Well, theres for you: leave us.
I beseech your honour, give me leave: a word, and
Ill have done presently.
I beseech you, do.
[To MARINA]  First, I would have you note, this is
an honourable man.
I desire to find him so, that I may worthily note him.
Next, hes the governor of this country, and a man
whom I am bound to.
If he govern the country, you are bound to him
indeed; but how honourable he is in that, I know not.
Pray you, without any more virginal fencing, will
you use him kindly? He will line your apron with gold.
What he will do graciously, I will thankfully receive.
Ha you done?
My lord, shes not paced yet: you must take some
pains to work her to your manage. Come, we will
leave his honour and her together. Go thy ways.
Exeunt Bawd, Pandar, and BOULT
Now, pretty one, how long have you been at this trade?
What trade, sir?
Why, I cannot namet but I shall offend.
I cannot be offended with my trade. Please you to name it.
How long have you been of this profession?
Eer since I can remember.
Did you go to t so young? Were you a gamester at
five or at seven?
Earlier too, sir, if now I be one.
Why, the house you dwell in proclaims you to be a
creature of sale.
Do you know this house to be a place of such resort,
and will come into t? I hear say you are of
honourable parts, and are the governor of this place.
Why, hath your principal made known unto you who I am?
Who is my principal?
Why, your herb-woman; she that sets seeds and roots
of shame and iniquity. O, you have heard something
of my power, and so stand aloof for more serious
wooing. But I protest to thee, pretty one, my
authority shall not see thee, or else look friendly
upon thee. Come, bring me to some private place:
come, come.
If you were born to honour, show it now;
If put upon you, make the judgment good
That thought you worthy of it.
Hows this? hows this? Some more; be sage.
For me,
That am a maid, though most ungentle fortune
Have placed me in this sty, where, since I came,
Diseases have been sold dearer than physic,
O, that the gods
Would set me free from this unhallowd place,
Though they did change me to the meanest bird
That flies i the purer air!
I did not think
Thou couldst have spoke so well; neer dreamd thou couldst.
Had I brought hither a corrupted mind,
Thy speech had alterd it. Hold, heres gold for thee:
Persever in that clear way thou goest,
And the gods strengthen thee!
The good gods preserve you!
For me, be you thoughten
That I came with no ill intent; for to me
The very doors and windows savour vilely.
Fare thee well. Thou art a piece of virtue, and
I doubt not but thy training hath been noble.
Hold, heres more gold for thee.
A curse upon him, die he like a thief,
That robs thee of thy goodness! If thou dost
Hear from me, it shall be for thy good.
Re-enter BOULT
I beseech your honour, one piece for me.
Avaunt, thou damned door-keeper!
Your house, but for this virgin that doth prop it,
Would sink and overwhelm you. Away!
Exit
Hows this? We must take another course with you.
If your peevish chastity, which is not worth a
breakfast in the cheapest country under the cope,
shall undo a whole household, let me be gelded like
a spaniel. Come your ways.
Whither would you have me?
I must have your maidenhead taken off, or the common
hangman shall execute it. Come your ways. Well
have no more gentlemen driven away. Come your ways, I say.
Re-enter Bawd
How now! whats the matter?
Worse and worse, mistress; she has here spoken holy
words to the Lord Lysimachus.
O abominable!
She makes our profession as it were to stink afore
the face of the gods.
Marry, hang her up for ever!
The nobleman would have dealt with her like a
nobleman, and she sent him away as cold as a
snowball; saying his prayers too.
Boult, take her away; use her at thy pleasure:
crack the glass of her virginity, and make the rest malleable.
An if she were a thornier piece of ground than she
is, she shall be ploughed.
Hark, hark, you gods!
She conjures: away with her! Would she had never
come within my doors! Marry, hang you! Shes born
to undo us. Will you not go the way of women-kind?
Marry, come up, my dish of chastity with rosemary and bays!
Exit
Come, mistress; come your ways with me.
Whither wilt thou have me?
To take from you the jewel you hold so dear.
Prithee, tell me one thing first.
Come now, your one thing.
What canst thou wish thine enemy to be?
Why, I could wish him to be my master, or rather, my mistress.
Neither of these are so bad as thou art,
Since they do better thee in their command.
Thou holdst a place, for which the painedst fiend
Of hell would not in reputation change:
Thou art the damned doorkeeper to every
Coistrel that comes inquiring for his Tib;
To the choleric fisting of every rogue
Thy ear is liable; thy food is such
As hath been belchd on by infected lungs.
What would you have me do? go to the wars, would
you? where a man may serve seven years for the loss
of a leg, and have not money enough in the end to
buy him a wooden one?
Do any thing but this thou doest. Empty
OLD receptacles, or common shores, of filth;
Serve by indenture to the common hangman:
Any of these ways are yet better than this;
For what thou professest, a baboon, could he speak,
Would own a name too dear. O, that the gods
Would safely deliver me from this place!
Here, heres gold for thee.
If that thy master would gain by thee,
Proclaim that I can sing, weave, sew, and dance,
With other virtues, which Ill keep from boast:
And I will undertake all these to teach.
I doubt not but this populous city will
Yield many scholars.
But can you teach all this you speak of?
Prove that I cannot, take me home again,
And prostitute me to the basest groom
That doth frequent your house.
Well, I will see what I can do for thee: if I can
place thee, I will.
But amongst honest women.
Faith, my acquaintance lies little amongst them.
But since my master and mistress have bought you,
theres no going but by their consent: therefore I
will make them acquainted with your purpose, and I
doubt not but I shall find them tractable enough.
Come, Ill do for thee what I can; come your ways.
Exeunt
ACT V
Enter GOWER
Marina thus the brothel scapes, and chances
Into an honest house, our story says.
She sings like one immortal, and she dances
As goddess-like to her admired lays;
Deep clerks she dumbs; and with her needle composes
Natures own shape, of bud, bird, branch, or berry,
That even her art sisters the natural roses;
Her inkle, silk, twin with the rubied cherry:
That pupils lacks she none of noble race,
Who pour their bounty on her; and her gain
She gives the cursed bawd. Here we her place;
And to her father turn our thoughts again,
Where we left him, on the sea. We there him lost;
Whence, driven before the winds, he is arrived
Here where his daughter dwells; and on this coast
Suppose him now at anchor. The city strived
God Neptunes annual feast to keep: from whence
Lysimachus our Tyrian ship espies,
His banners sable, trimmd with rich expense;
And to him in his barge with fervor hies.
In your supposing once more put your sight
Of heavy Pericles; think this his bark:
Where what is done in action, more, if might,
Shall be discoverd; please you, sit and hark.
Exit
SCENE I. On board PERICLES ship, off Mytilene. A close
pavilion on deck, with a curtain before it; PERICLES
within it, reclined on a couch. A barge lying
beside the Tyrian vessel.
Enter two Sailors, one belonging to the Tyrian vessel, the other to the barge; to them HELICANUS
[To the Sailor of Mytilene]  Where is lord Helicanus?
he can resolve you.
O, here he is.
Sir, theres a barge put off from Mytilene,
And in it is Lysimachus the governor,
Who craves to come aboard. What is your will?
That he have his. Call up some gentlemen.
Ho, gentlemen! my lord calls.
Enter two or three Gentlemen
Doth your lordship call?
Gentlemen, theres some of worth would come aboard;
I pray ye, greet them fairly.
The Gentlemen and the two Sailors descend, and go on board the barge
Enter, from thence, LYSIMACHUS and Lords; with the Gentlemen and the two Sailors
Sir,
This is the man that can, in aught you would,
Resolve you.
Hail, reverend sir! the gods preserve you!
And you, sir, to outlive the age I am,
And die as I would do.
You wish me well.
Being on shore, honouring of Neptunes triumphs,
Seeing this goodly vessel ride before us,
I made to it, to know of whence you are.
First, what is your place?
I am the governor of this place you lie before.
Sir,
Our vessel is of Tyre, in it the king;
A man who for this three months hath not spoken
To any one, nor taken sustenance
But to prorogue his grief.
Upon what ground is his distemperature?
Twould be too tedious to repeat;
But the main grief springs from the loss
Of a beloved daughter and a wife.
May we not see him?
You may;
But bootless is your sight: he will not speak To any.
Yet let me obtain my wish.
Behold him.
PERICLES discovered
This was a goodly person,
Till the disaster that, one mortal night,
Drove him to this.
Sir king, all hail! the gods preserve you!
Hail, royal sir!
It is in vain; he will not speak to you.
Sir,
We have a maid in Mytilene, I durst wager,
Would win some words of him.
Tis well bethought.
She questionless with her sweet harmony
And other chosen attractions, would allure,
And make a battery through his deafend parts,
Which now are midway stoppd:
She is all happy as the fairest of all,
And, with her fellow maids is now upon
The leafy shelter that abuts against
The islands side.
Whispers a Lord, who goes off in the barge of LYSIMACHUS
Sure, alls effectless; yet nothing well omit
That bears recoverys name. But, since your kindness
