Thou chidest me well: proud Bolingbroke, I come
To change blows with thee for our day of doom.
This ague fit of fear is over-blown;
An easy task it is to win our own.
Say, Scroop, where lies our uncle with his power?
Speak sweetly, man, although thy looks be sour.
Men judge by the complexion of the sky
The state and inclination of the day:
So may you by my dull and heavy eye,
My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say.
I play the torturer, by small and small
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken:
Your uncle York is joind with Bolingbroke,
And all your northern castles yielded up,
And all your southern gentlemen in arms
Upon his party.
Thou hast said enough.
Beshrew thee, cousin, which didst lead me forth
To DUKE OF AUMERLE
Of that sweet way I was in to despair!
What say you now? what comfort have we now?
By heaven, Ill hate him everlastingly
That bids me be of comfort any more.
Go to Flint castle: there Ill pine away;
A king, woes slave, shall kingly woe obey.
That power I have, discharge; and let them go
To ear the land that hath some hope to grow,
For I have none: let no man speak again
To alter this, for counsel is but vain.
My liege, one word.
He does me double wrong
That wounds me with the flatteries of his tongue.
Discharge my followers: let them hence away,
From Richards night to Bolingbrokes fair day.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Wales. Before Flint castle.
Enter, with drum and colours, HENRY BOLINGBROKE, DUKE OF YORK, NORTHUMBERLAND, Attendants, and forces
So that by this intelligence we learn
The Welshmen are dispersed, and Salisbury
Is gone to meet the king, who lately landed
With some few private friends upon this coast.
The news is very fair and good, my lord:
Richard not far from hence hath hid his head.
It would beseem the Lord Northumberland
To say King Richard: alack the heavy day
When such a sacred king should hide his head.
Your grace mistakes; only to be brief
Left I his title out.
The time hath been,
Would you have been so brief with him, he would
Have been so brief with you, to shorten you,
For taking so the head, your whole heads length.
Mistake not, uncle, further than you should.
Take not, good cousin, further than you should.
Lest you mistake the heavens are oer our heads.
I know it, uncle, and oppose not myself
Against their will. But who comes here?
Enter HENRY PERCY
Welcome, Harry: what, will not this castle yield?
The castle royally is mannd, my lord,
Against thy entrance.
Royally!
Why, it contains no king?
Yes, my good lord,
It doth contain a king; King Richard lies
Within the limits of yon lime and stone:
And with him are the Lord Aumerle, Lord Salisbury,
Sir Stephen Scroop, besides a clergyman
Of holy reverence; who, I cannot learn.
O, belike it is the Bishop of Carlisle.
Noble lords,
Go to the rude ribs of that ancient castle;
Through brazen trumpet send the breath of parley
Into his ruind ears, and thus deliver:
Henry Bolingbroke
On both his knees doth kiss King Richards hand
And sends allegiance and true faith of heart
To his most royal person, hither come
Even at his feet to lay my arms and power,
Provided that my banishment repeald
And lands restored again be freely granted:
If not, Ill use the advantage of my power
And lay the summers dust with showers of blood
Raind from the wounds of slaughterd Englishmen:
The which, how far off from the mind of Bolingbroke
It is, such crimson tempest should bedrench
The fresh green lap of fair King Richards land,
My stooping duty tenderly shall show.
Go, signify as much, while here we march
Upon the grassy carpet of this plain.
Lets march without the noise of threatening drum,
That from this castles tatterd battlements
Our fair appointments may be well perused.
Methinks King Richard and myself should meet
With no less terror than the elements
Of fire and water, when their thundering shock
At meeting tears the cloudy cheeks of heaven.
Be he the fire, Ill be the yielding water:
The rage be his, whilst on the earth I rain
My waters; on the earth, and not on him.
March on, and mark King Richard how he looks.
Parle without, and answer within. Then a flourish.  Enter on the walls, KING RICHARD II, the BISHOP OF  CARLISLE, DUKE OF AUMERLE, SIR STEPHEN SCROOP, and EARL OF SALISBURY
See, see, King Richard doth himself appear,
As doth the blushing discontented sun
From out the fiery portal of the east,
When he perceives the envious clouds are bent
To dim his glory and to stain the track
Of his bright passage to the occident.
Yet looks he like a king: behold, his eye,
As bright as is the eagles, lightens forth
Controlling majesty: alack, alack, for woe,
That any harm should stain so fair a show!
We are amazed; and thus long have we stood
To watch the fearful bending of thy knee,
To NORTHUMBERLAND
Because we thought ourself thy lawful king:
And if we be, how dare thy joints forget
To pay their awful duty to our presence?
If we be not, show us the hand of God
That hath dismissed us from our stewardship;
For well we know, no hand of blood and bone
Can gripe the sacred handle of our sceptre,
Unless he do profane, steal, or usurp.
And though you think that all, as you have done,
Have torn their souls by turning them from us,
And we are barren and bereft of friends;
Yet know, my master, God omnipotent,
Is mustering in his clouds on our behalf
Armies of pestilence; and they shall strike
Your children yet unborn and unbegot,
That lift your vassal hands against my head
And threat the glory of my precious crown.
Tell Bolingbroke--for yond methinks he stands--
That every stride he makes upon my land
Is dangerous treason: he is come to open
The purple testament of bleeding war;
But ere the crown he looks for live in peace,
Ten thousand bloody crowns of mothers sons
Shall ill become the flower of Englands face,
Change the complexion of her maid-pale peace
To scarlet indignation and bedew
Her pastures grass with faithful English blood.
The king of heaven forbid our lord the king
Should so with civil and uncivil arms
Be rushd upon! Thy thrice noble cousin
Harry Bolingbroke doth humbly kiss thy hand;
And by the honourable tomb he swears,
That stands upon your royal grandsires bones,
And by the royalties of both your bloods,
Currents that spring from one most gracious head,
And by the buried hand of warlike Gaunt,
And by the worth and honour of himself,
Comprising all that may be sworn or said,
His coming hither hath no further scope
Than for his lineal royalties and to beg
Enfranchisement immediate on his kn ees:
Which on thy royal party granted once,
His glittering arms he will commend to rust,
His barbed steeds to stables, and his heart
To faithful service of your majesty.
This swears he, as he is a prince, is just;
And, as I am a gentleman, I credit him.
Northumberland, say thus the king returns:
His noble cousin is right welcome hither;
And all the number of his fair demands
Shall be accomplishd without contradiction:
With all the gracious utterance thou hast
Speak to his gentle hearing kind commends.
We do debase ourselves, cousin, do we not,
To DUKE OF AUMERLE
To look so poorly and to speak so fair?
Shall we call back Northumberland, and send
Defiance to the traitor, and so die?
No, good my lord; lets fight with gentle words
Till time lend friends and friends their helpful swords.
O God, O God! that eer this tongue of mine,
That laid the sentence of dread banishment
On yon proud man, should take it off again
With words of sooth! O that I were as great
As is my grief, or lesser than my name!
Or that I could forget what I have been,
Or not remember what I must be now!
Swellst thou, proud heart? Ill give thee scope to beat,
Since foes have scope to beat both thee and me.
Northumberland comes back from Bolingbroke.
What must the king do now? must he submit?
The king shall do it: must he be deposed?
The king shall be contented: must he lose
The name of king? o Gods name, let it go:
Ill give my jewels for a set of beads,
My gorgeous palace for a hermitage,
My gay apparel for an almsmans gown,
My figured goblets for a dish of wood,
My sceptre for a palmers walking staff,
My subjects for a pair of carved saints
And my large kingdom for a little grave,
A little little grave, an obscure grave;
Or Ill be buried in the kings highway,
Some way of common trade, where subjects feet
May hourly trample on their sovereigns head;
For on my heart they tread now whilst I live;
And buried once, why not upon my head?
Aumerle, thou weepst, my tender-hearted cousin!
Well make foul weather with despised tears;
Our sighs and they shall lodge the summer corn,
And make a dearth in this revolting land.
Or shall we play the wantons with our woes,
And make some pretty match with shedding tears?
As thus, to drop them still upon one place,
Till they have fretted us a pair of graves
Within the earth; and, therein laid,--there lies
Two kinsmen diggd their graves with weeping eyes.
Would not this ill do well? Well, well, I see
I talk but idly, and you laugh at me.
Most mighty prince, my Lord Northumberland,
What says King Bolingbroke? will his majesty
Give Richard leave to live till Richard die?
You make a leg, and Bolingbroke says ay.
My lord, in the base court he doth attend
To speak with you; may it please you to come down.
Down, down I come; like glistering Phaethon,
Wanting the manage of unruly jades.
In the base court? Base court, where kings grow base,
To come at traitors calls and do them grace.
In the base court? Come down? Down, court!
down, king!
For night-owls shriek where mounting larks
should sing.
Exeunt from above
What says his majesty?
Sorrow and grief of heart
Makes him speak fondly, like a frantic man
Yet he is come.
Enter KING RICHARD and his attendants below
Stand all apart,
And show fair duty to his majesty.
He kneels down
My gracious lord,--
Fair cousin, you debase your princely knee
To make the base earth proud with kissing it:
Me rather had my heart might feel your love
Than my unpleased eye see your courtesy.
Up, cousin, up; your heart is up, I know,
Thus high at least, although your knee be low.
My gracious lord, I come but for mine own.
Your own is yours, and I am yours, and all.
So far be mine, my most redoubted lord,
As my true service shall deserve your love.
Well you deserve: they well deserve to have,
That know the strongst and surest way to get.
Uncle, give me your hands: nay, dry your eyes;
Tears show their love, but want their remedies.
Cousin, I am too young to be your father,
Though you are old enough to be my heir.
What you will have, Ill give, and willing too;
For do we must what force will have us do.
Set on towards London, cousin, is it so?
Yea, my good lord.
Then I must not say no.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE IV. LANGLEY. The DUKE OF YORKs garden.
Enter the QUEEN and two Ladies
What sport shall we devise here in this garden,
To drive away the heavy thought of care?
Madam, well play at bowls.
Twill make me think the world is full of rubs,
And that my fortune rubs against the bias.
Madam, well dance.
My legs can keep no measure in delight,
When my poor heart no measure keeps in grief:
Therefore, no dancing, girl; some other sport.
Madam, well tell tales.
Of sorrow or of joy?
Of either, madam.
Of neither, girl:
For of joy, being altogether wanting,
It doth remember me the more of sorrow;
Or if of grief, being altogether had,
It adds more sorrow to my want of joy:
For what I have I need not to repeat;
And what I want it boots not to complain.
Madam, Ill sing.
Tis well that thou hast cause
But thou shouldst please me better, wouldst thou weep.
I could weep, madam, would it do you good.
And I could sing, would weeping do me good,
And never borrow any tear of thee.
Enter a Gardener, and two Servants
But stay, here come the gardeners:
Lets step into the shadow of these trees.
My wretchedness unto a row of pins,
Theyll talk of state; for every one doth so
Against a change; woe is forerun with woe.
QUEEN and Ladies retire
Go, bind thou up yon dangling apricocks,
Which, like unruly children, make their sire
Stoop with oppression of their prodigal weight:
Give some supportance to the bending twigs.
Go thou, and like an executioner,
Cut off the heads of too fast growing sprays,
That look too lofty in our commonwealth:
All must be even in our government.
You thus employd, I will go root away
The noisome weeds, which without profit suck
The soils fertility from wholesome flowers.
Why should we in the compass of a pale
Keep law and form and due proportion,
Showing, as in a model, our firm estate,
When our sea-walled garden, the whole land,
Is full of weeds, her fairest flowers choked up,
Her fruit-trees all upturned, her hedges ruind,
Her knots disorderd and her wholesome herbs
Swarming with caterpillars?
Hold thy peace:
He that hath sufferd this disorderd spring
Hath now himself met with the fall of leaf:
The weeds which his broad-spreading leaves did shelter,
That seemd in eating him to hold him up,
Are pluckd up root and all by Bolingbroke,
I mean the Earl of Wiltshire, Bushy, Green.
What, are they dead?
They are; and Bolingbroke
Hath seized the wasteful king. O, what pity is it
That he had not so trimmd and dressd his land
As we this garden! We at time of year
Do wound the bark, the skin of our fruit-trees,
Lest, being over-proud in sap and blood,
With too much riches it confound itself:
Had he done so to great and growing men,
They might have lived to bear and he to taste
Their fruits of duty: superfluous branches
We lop away, that bearing boughs may live:
Had he done so, himself had borne the crown,
Which waste of idle hours hath quite thrown down.
What, think you then the king shall be deposed?
Depressd he is already, and deposed
Tis doubt he will be: letters came last night
To a dear friend of the good Duke of Yorks,
That tell black tidings.
O, I am pressd to death through want of speaking!
Coming forward
Thou, old Adams likeness, set to dress this garden,
How dares thy harsh rude tongue sound this unpleasing news?
What Eve, what serpent, hath suggested thee
To make a second fall of cursed man?
Why dost thou say King Richard is deposed?
Darest thou, thou little better thing than earth,
Divine his downfall? Say, where, when, and how,
Camest thou by this ill tidings? speak, thou wretch.
Pardon me, madam: little joy have I
To breathe this news; yet what I say is true.
King Richard, he is in the mighty hold
Of Bolingbroke: their fortunes both are weighd:
In your lords scale is nothing but himself,
And some few vanities that make him light;
But in the balance of great Bolingbroke,
Besides himself, are all the English peers,
And with that odds he weighs King Richard down.
Post you to London, and you will find it so;
I speak no more than every one doth know.
Nimble mischance, that art so light of foot,
Doth not thy embassage belong to me,
And am I last that knows it? O, thou thinkst
To serve me last, that I may longest keep
Thy sorrow in my breast. Come, ladies, go,
To meet at London Londons king in woe.
What, was I born to this, that my sad look
Should grace the triumph of great Bolingbroke?
Gardener, for telling me these news of woe,
Pray God the plants thou graftst may never grow.
Exeunt QUEEN and Ladies
Poor queen! so that thy state might be no worse,
I would my skill were subject to thy curse.
Here did she fall a tear; here in this place
Ill set a bank of rue, sour herb of grace:
Rue, even for ruth, here shortly shall be seen,
In the remembrance of a weeping queen.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Westminster Hall.
Enter, as to the Parliament, HENRY BOLINGBROKE,  DUKE OF AUMERLE, NORTHUMBERLAND, HENRY PERCY, LORD  FITZWATER, DUKE OF SURREY, the BISHOP OF CARLISLE,  the Abbot Of Westminster, and another Lord, Herald, Officers, and BAGOT
Call forth Bagot.
Now, Bagot, freely speak thy mind;
What thou dost know of noble Gloucesters death,
Who wrought it with the king, and who performd
The bloody office of his timeless end.
Then set before my face the Lord Aumerle.
Cousin, stand forth, and look upon that man.
My Lord Aumerle, I know your daring tongue
Scorns to unsay what once it hath deliverd.
In that dead time when Gloucesters death was plotted,
I heard you say, Is not my arm of length,
That reacheth from the restful English court
As far as Calais, to mine uncles head?
Amongst much other talk, that very time,
I heard you say that you had rather refuse
The offer of an hundred thousand crowns
Than Bolingbrokes return to England;
Adding withal how blest this land would be
In this your cousins death.
Princes and noble lords,
What answer shall I make to this base man?
Shall I so much dishonour my fair stars,
On equal terms to give him chastisement?
Either I must, or have mine honour soild
With the attainder of his slanderous lips.
There is my gage, the manual seal of death,
That marks thee out for hell: I say, thou liest,
And will maintain what thou hast said is false
In thy heart-blood, though being all too base
To stain the temper of my knightly sword.
Bagot, forbear; thou shalt not take it up.
Excepting one, I would he were the best
In all this presence that hath moved me so.
If that thy valour stand on sympathy,
There is my gage, Aumerle, in gage to thine:
By that fair sun which shows me where thou standst,
I heard thee say, and vauntingly thou spakest it
That thou wert cause of noble Gloucesters death.
If thou denyst it twenty times, thou liest;
And I will turn thy falsehood to thy heart,
Where it was forged, with my rapiers point.
Thou darest not, coward, live to see that day.
Now by my soul, I would it were this hour.
Fitzwater, thou art damnd to hell for this.
Aumerle, thou liest; his honour is as true
In this appeal as thou art all unjust;
And that thou art so, there I throw my gage,
To prove it on thee to the extremest point
Of mortal breathing: seize it, if thou darest.
An if I do not, may my hands rot off
And never brandish more revengeful steel
Over the glittering helmet of my foe!
I task the earth to the like, forsworn Aumerle;
And spur thee on with full as many lies
As may be holload in thy treacherous ear
From sun to sun: there is my honours pawn;
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
Who sets me else? by heaven, Ill throw at all:
I have a thousand spirits in one breast,
To answer twenty thousand such as you.
My Lord Fitzwater, I do remember well
The very time Aumerle and you did talk.
Tis very true: you were in presence then;
And you can witness with me this is true.
As false, by heaven, as heaven itself is true.
Surrey, thou liest.
Dishonourable boy!
That lie shall lie so heavy on my sword,
That it shall render vengeance and revenge
Till thou the lie-giver and that lie do lie
In earth as quiet as thy fathers skull:
In proof whereof, there is my honours pawn;
Engage it to the trial, if thou darest.
How fondly dost thou spur a forward horse!
If I dare eat, or drink, or breathe, or live,
I dare meet Surrey in a wilderness,
And spit upon him, whilst I say he lies,
And lies, and lies: there is my bond of faith,
To tie thee to my strong correction.
As I intend to thrive in this new world,
Aumerle is guilty of my true appeal:
Besides, I heard the banishd Norfolk say
That thou, Aumerle, didst send two of thy men
To execute the noble duke at Calais.
Some honest Christian trust me with a gage
That Norfolk lies: here do I throw down this,
If he may be repeald, to try his honour.
These differences shall all rest under gage
Till Norfolk be repeald: repeald he shall be,
And, though mine enemy, restored again
To all his lands and signories: when hes returnd,
Against Aumerle we will enforce his trial.
That honourable day shall neer be seen.
Many a time hath banishd Norfolk fought
For Jesu Christ in glorious Christian field,
Streaming the ensign of the Christian cross
Against black pagans, Turks, and Saracens:
And toild with works of war, retired himself
To Italy; and there at Venice gave
His body to that pleasant countrys earth,
And his pure soul unto his captain Christ,
Under whose colours he had fought so long.
Why, bishop, is Norfolk dead?
As surely as I live, my lord.
Sweet peace conduct his sweet soul to the bosom
Of good old Abraham! Lords appellants,
Your differences shall all rest under gage
Till we assign you to your days of trial.
Enter DUKE OF YORK, attended
Great Duke of Lancaster, I come to thee
From plume-pluckd Richard; who with willing soul
Adopts thee heir, and his high sceptre yields
To the possession of thy royal hand:
Ascend his throne, descending now from him;
And long live Henry, fourth of that name!
In Gods name, Ill ascend the regal throne.
Marry. God forbid!
Worst in this royal presence may I speak,
Yet best beseeming me to speak the truth.
Would God that any in this noble presence
Were enough noble to be upright judge
Of noble Richard! then true noblesse would
Learn him forbearance from so foul a wrong.
What subject can give sentence on his king?
And who sits here that is not Richards subject?
Thieves are not judged but they are by to hear,
Although apparent guilt be seen in them;
And shall the figure of Gods majesty,
His captain, steward, deputy-elect,
Anointed, crowned, planted many years,
Be judged by subject and inferior breath,
And he himself not present? O, forfend it, God,
That in a Christian climate souls refined
Should show so heinous, black, obscene a deed!
I speak to subjects, and a subject speaks,
Stirrd up by God, thus boldly for his king:
My Lord of Hereford here, whom you call king,
Is a foul traitor to proud Herefords king:
And if you crown him, let me prophesy:
The blood of English shall manure the ground,
And future ages groan for this foul act;
Peace shall go sleep with Turks and infidels,
And in this seat of peace tumultuous wars
Shall kin with kin and kind with kind confound;
Disorder, horror, fear and mutiny
Shall here inhabit, and this land be calld
The field of Golgotha and dead mens skulls.
O, if you raise this house against this house,
It will the woefullest division prove
That ever fell upon this cursed earth.
Prevent it, resist it, let it not be so,
Lest child, childs children, cry against you woe!
Well have you argued, sir; and, for your pains,
Of capital treason we arrest you here.
My Lord of Westminster, be it your charge
To keep him safely till his day of trial.
May it please you, lords, to grant the commons suit.
Fetch hither Richard, that in common view
He may surrender; so we shall proceed
Without suspicion.
I will be his conduct.
Exit
Lords, you that here are under our arrest,
Procure your sureties for your days of answer.
Little are we beholding to your love,
And little lookd for at your helping hands.
Re-enter DUKE OF YORK, with KING RICHARD II, and Officers bearing the regalia
Alack, why am I sent for to a king,
Before I have shook off the regal thoughts
Wherewith I reignd? I hardly yet have learnd
To insinuate, flatter, bow, and bend my limbs:
Give sorrow leave awhile to tutor me
To this submission. Yet I well remember
The favours of these men: were they not mine?
Did they not sometime cry, all hail! to me?
So Judas did to Christ: but he, in twelve,
Found truth in all but one: I, in twelve thousand, none.
God save the king! Will no man say amen?
Am I both priest and clerk? well then, amen.
God save the king! although I be not he;
And yet, amen, if heaven do think him me.
To do what service am I sent for hither?
To do that office of thine own good will
Which tired majesty did make thee offer,
The resignation of thy state and crown
To Henry Bolingbroke.
Give me the crown. Here, cousin, seize the crown;
Here cousin:
On this side my hand, and on that side yours.
Now is this golden crown like a deep well
That owes two buckets, filling one another,
The emptier ever dancing in the air,
The other down, unseen and full of water:
That bucket down and full of tears am I,
Drinking my griefs, whilst you mount up on high.
I thought you had been willing to resign.
My crown I am; but still my griefs are mine:
You may my glories and my state depose,
But not my griefs; still am I king of those.
Part of your cares you give me with your crown.
Your cares set up do not pluck my cares down.
My care is loss of care, by old care done;
Your care is gain of care, by new care won:
The cares I give I have, though given away;
They tend the crown, yet still with me they stay.
Are you contented to resign the crown?
Ay, no; no, ay; for I must nothing be;
Therefore no no, for I resign to thee.
Now mark me, how I will undo myself;
I give this heavy weight from off my head
And this unwieldy sceptre from my hand,
The pride of kingly sway from out my heart;
With mine own tears I wash away my balm,
With mine own hands I give away my crown,
With mine own tongue deny my sacred state,
With mine own breath release all dutys rites:
All pomp and majesty I do forswear;
My manors, rents, revenues I forego;
My acts, decrees, and statutes I deny:
God pardon all oaths that are broke to me!
God keep all vows unbroke that swear to thee!
Make me, that nothing have, with nothing grieved,
And thou with all pleased, that hast all achieved!
Long mayst thou live in Richards seat to sit,
And soon lie Richard in an earthly pit!
God save King Harry, unkingd Richard says,
And send him many years of sunshine days!
What more remains?
No more, but that you read
These accusations and these grievous crimes
Committed by your person and your followers
Against the state and profit of this land;
That, by confessing them, the souls of men
May deem that you are worthily deposed.
Must I do so? and must I ravel out
My weaved-up folly? Gentle Northumberland,
If thy offences were upon record,
Would it not shame thee in so fair a troop
To read a lecture of them? If thou wouldst,
There shouldst thou find one heinous article,
Containing the deposing of a king
And cracking the strong warrant of an oath,
Markd with a blot, damnd in the book of heaven:
Nay, all of you that stand and look upon,
Whilst that my wretchedness doth bait myself,
Though some of you with Pilate wash your hands
Showing an outward pity; yet you Pilates
Have here deliverd me to my sour cross,
And water cannot wash away your sin.
My lord, dispatch; read oer these articles.
Mine eyes are full of tears, I cannot see:
And yet salt water blinds them not so much
But they can see a sort of traitors here.
Nay, if I turn mine eyes upon myself,
I find myself a traitor with the rest;
For I have given here my souls consent
To undeck the pompous body of a king;
Made glory base and sovereignty a slave,
Proud majesty a subject, state a peasant.
My lord,--
No lord of thine, thou haught insulting man,
Nor no mans lord; I have no name, no title,
No, not that name was given me at the font,
But tis usurpd: alack the heavy day,
That I have worn so many winters out,
And know not now what name to call myself!
O that I were a mockery king of snow,
Standing before the sun of Bolingbroke,
To melt myself away in water-drops!
Good king, great king, and yet not greatly good,
An if my word be sterling yet in England,
Let it command a mirror hither straight,
That it may show me what a face I have,
Since it is bankrupt of his majesty.
Go some of you and fetch a looking-glass.
Exit an attendant
Read oer this paper while the glass doth come.
Fiend, thou tormentst me ere I come to hell!
Urge it no more, my Lord Northumberland.
The commons will not then be satisfied.
They shall be satisfied: Ill read enough,
When I do see the very book indeed
Where all my sins are writ, and thats myself.
Re-enter Attendant, with a glass
Give me the glass, and therein will I read.
No deeper wrinkles yet? hath sorrow struck
So many blows upon this face of mine,
And made no deeper wounds? O flattering glass,
Like to my followers in prosperity,
Thou dost beguile me! Was this face the face
That every day under his household roof
Did keep ten thousand men? was this the face
That, like the sun, did make beholders wink?
Was this the face that faced so many follies,
And was at last out-faced by Bolingbroke?
A brittle glory shineth in this face:
As brittle as the glory is the face;
Dashes the glass against the ground
For there it is, crackd in a hundred shivers.
Mark, silent king, the moral of this sport,
How soon my sorrow hath destroyd my face.
The shadow of your sorrow hath destroyd
The shadow or your face.
Say that again.
The shadow of my sorrow! ha! lets see:
Tis very true, my grief lies all within;
And these external manners of laments
Are merely shadows to the unseen grief
That swells with silence in the tortured soul;
There lies the substance: and I thank thee, king,
For thy great bounty, that not only givest
Me cause to wail but teachest me the way
How to lament the cause. Ill beg one boon,
And then be gone and trouble you no more.
Shall I obtain it?
Name it, fair cousin.
Fair cousin? I am greater than a king:
For when I was a king, my flatterers
Were then but subjects; being now a subject,
I have a king here to my flatterer.
Being so great, I have no need to beg.
Yet ask.
And shall I have?
You shall.
Then give me leave to go.
Whither?
Whither you will, so I were from your sights.
Go, some of you convey him to the Tower.
O, good! convey? conveyers are you all,
That rise thus nimbly by a true kings fall.
Exeunt KING RICHARD II, some Lords, and a Guard
On Wednesday next we solemnly set down
Our coronation: lords, prepare yourselves.
Exeunt all except the BISHOP OF CARLISLE, the Abbot of Westminster, and DUKE OF AUMERLE
A woeful pageant have we here beheld.
The woes to come; the children yet unborn.
Shall feel this day as sharp to them as thorn.
You holy clergymen, is there no plot
To rid the realm of this pernicious blot?
My lord,
Before I freely speak my mind herein,
You shall not only take the sacrament
To bury mine intents, but also to effect
Whatever I shall happen to devise.
I see your brows are full of discontent,
Your hearts of sorrow and your eyes of tears:
Come home with me to supper; and Ill lay
A plot shall show us all a merry day.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. London. A street leading to the Tower.
Enter QUEEN and Ladies
This way the king will come; this is the way
To Julius Caesars ill-erected tower,
To whose flint bosom my condemned lord
Is doomd a prisoner by proud Bolingbroke:
Here let us rest, if this rebellious earth
Have any resting for her true kings queen.
Enter KING RICHARD II and Guard
But soft, but see, or rather do not see,
My fair rose wither: yet look up, behold,
That you in pity may dissolve to dew,
And wash him fresh again with true-love tears.
Ah, thou, the model where old Troy did stand,
Thou map of honour, thou King Richards tomb,
And not King Richard; thou most beauteous inn,
Why should hard-favourd grief be lodged in thee,
When triumph is become an alehouse guest?
Join not with grief, fair woman, do not so,
To make my end too sudden: learn, good soul,
To think our former state a happy dream;
From which awaked, the truth of what we are
Shows us but this: I am sworn brother, sweet,
To grim Necessity, and he and I
Will keep a league till death. Hie thee to France
And cloister thee in some religious house:
Our holy lives must win a new worlds crown,
Which our profane hours here have stricken down.
What, is my Richard both in shape and mind
Transformd and weakend? hath Bolingbroke deposed
Thine intellect? hath he been in thy heart?
The lion dying thrusteth forth his paw,
And wounds the earth, if nothing else, with rage
To be oerpowerd; and wilt thou, pupil-like,
Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod,
And fawn on rage with base humility,
Which art a lion and a king of beasts?
A king of beasts, indeed; if aught but beasts,
I had been still a happy king of men.
Good sometime queen, prepare thee hence for France:
Think I am dead and that even here thou takest,
As from my death-bed, thy last living leave.
In winters tedious nights sit by the fire
With good old folks and let them tell thee tales
Of woeful ages long ago betid;
And ere thou bid good night, to quit their griefs,
Tell thou the lamentable tale of me
And send the hearers weeping to their beds:
For why, the senseless brands will sympathize
The heavy accent of thy moving tongue
And in compassion weep the fire out;
And some will mourn in ashes, some coal-black,
For the deposing of a rightful king.
Enter NORTHUMBERLAND and others
My lord, the mind of Bolingbroke is changed:
You must to Pomfret, not unto the Tower.
And, madam, there is order taen for you;
With all swift speed you must away to France.
Northumberland, thou ladder wherewithal
The mounting Bolingbroke ascends my throne,
The time shall not be many hours of age
More than it is ere foul sin gathering head
Shalt break into corruption: thou shalt think,
Though he divide the realm and give thee half,
It is too little, helping him to all;
And he shall think that thou, which knowst the way
To plant unrightful kings, wilt know again,
Being neer so little urged, another way
To pluck him headlong from the usurped throne.
The love of wicked men converts to fear;
That fear to hate, and hate turns one or both
To worthy danger and deserved death.
My guilt be on my head, and there an end.
Take leave and part; for you must part forthwith.
Doubly divorced! Bad men, you violate
A twofold marriage, twixt my crown and me,
And then betwixt me and my married wife.
Let me unkiss the oath twixt thee and me;
And yet not so, for with a kiss twas made.
Part us, Northumberland; I toward the north,
Where shivering cold and sickness pines the clime;
My wife to France: from whence, set forth in pomp,
She came adorned hither like sweet May,
Sent back like Hallowmas or shortst of day.
And must we be divided? must we part?
Ay, hand from hand, my love, and heart from heart.
Banish us both and send the king with me.
That were some love but little policy.
Then whither he goes, thither let me go.
So two, together weeping, make one woe.
Weep thou for me in France, I for thee here;
Better far off than near, be neer the near.
Go, count thy way with sighs; I mine with groans.
So longest way shall have the longest moans.
Twice for one step Ill groan, the way being short,
And piece the way out with a heavy heart.
Come, come, in wooing sorrow lets be brief,
Since, wedding it, there is such length in grief;
One kiss shall stop our mouths, and dumbly part;
Thus give I mine, and thus take I thy heart.
Give me mine own again; twere no good part
To take on me to keep and kill thy heart.
So, now I have mine own again, be gone,
That I might strive to kill it with a groan.
We make woe wanton with this fond delay:
Once more, adieu; the rest let sorrow say.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The DUKE OF YORKs palace.
Enter DUKE OF YORK and DUCHESS OF YORK
My lord, you told me you would tell the rest,
When weeping made you break the story off,
of our two cousins coming into London.
Where did I leave?
At that sad stop, my lord,
Where rude misgovernd hands from windows tops
Threw dust and rubbish on King Richards head.
Then, as I said, the duke, great Bolingbroke,
Mounted upon a hot and fiery steed
Which his aspiring rider seemd to know,
With slow but stately pace kept on his course,
Whilst all tongues cried God save thee,
Bolingbroke!
You would have thought the very windows spake,
So many greedy looks of young and old
Through casements darted their desiring eyes
Upon his visage, and that all the walls
With painted imagery had said at once
Jesu preserve thee! welcome, Bolingbroke!
Whilst he, from the one side to the other turning,
Bareheaded, lower than his proud steeds neck,
Bespake them thus: I thank you, countrymen:
And thus still doing, thus he passd along.
Alack, poor Richard! where rode he the whilst?
As in a theatre, the eyes of men,
After a well-graced actor leaves the stage,
Are idly bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be tedious;
Even so, or with much more contempt, mens eyes
Did scowl on gentle Richard; no man cried God save him!
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home:
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head:
Which with such gentle sorrow he shook off,
His face still combating with tears and smiles,
The badges of his grief and patience,
That had not God, for some strong purpose, steeld
The hearts of men, they must perforce have melted
And barbarism itself have pitied him.
But heaven hath a hand in these events,
To whose high will we bound our calm contents.
To Bolingbroke are we sworn subjects now,
Whose state and honour I for aye allow.
Here comes my son Aumerle.
Aumerle that was;
But that is lost for being Richards friend,
And, madam, you must call him Rutland now:
I am in parliament pledge for his truth
And lasting fealty to the new-made king.
Enter DUKE OF AUMERLE
Welcome, my son: who are the violets now
That strew the green lap of the new come spring?
Madam, I know not, nor I greatly care not:
God knows I had as lief be none as one.
Well, bear you well in this new spring of time,
Lest you be croppd before you come to prime.
What news from Oxford? hold those justs and triumphs?
For aught I know, my lord, they do.
You will be there, I know.
If God prevent not, I purpose so.
What seal is that, that hangs without thy bosom?
Yea, lookst thou pale? let me see the writing.
My lord, tis nothing.
No matter, then, who see it;
I will be satisfied; let me see the writing.
I do beseech your grace to pardon me:
It is a matter of small consequence,
Which for some reasons I would not have seen.
Which for some reasons, sir, I mean to see.
I fear, I fear,--
What should you fear?
Tis nothing but some bond, that he is enterd into
For gay apparel gainst the triumph day.
Bound to himself! what doth he with a bond
That he is bound to? Wife, thou art a fool.
Boy, let me see the writing.
I do beseech you, pardon me; I may not show it.
I will be satisfied; let me see it, I say.
He plucks it out of his bosom and reads it
Treason! foul treason! Villain! traitor! slave!
What is the matter, my lord?
Ho! who is within there?
Enter a Servant
Saddle my horse.
God for his mercy, what treachery is here!
Why, what is it, my lord?
Give me my boots, I say; saddle my horse.
Now, by mine honour, by my life, by my troth,
I will appeach the villain.
What is the matter?
Peace, foolish woman.
I will not peace. What is the matter, Aumerle.
Good mother, be content; it is no more
Than my poor life must answer.
Thy life answer!
Bring me my boots: I will unto the king.
Re-enter Servant with boots
Strike him, Aumerle. Poor boy, thou art amazed.
Hence, villain! never more come in my sight.
Give me my boots, I say.
Why, York, what wilt thou do?
Wilt thou not hide the trespass of thine own?
Have we more sons? or are we like to have?
Is not my teeming date drunk up with time?
And wilt thou pluck my fair son from mine age,
And rob me of a happy mothers name?
Is he not like thee? is he not thine own?
Thou fond mad woman,
Wilt thou conceal this dark conspiracy?
A dozen of them here have taen the sacrament,
And interchangeably set down their hands,
To kill the king at Oxford.
He shall be none;
Well keep him here: then what is that to him?
Away, fond woman! were he twenty times my son,
I would appeach him.
Hadst thou groand for him
As I have done, thou wouldst be more pitiful.
But now I know thy mind; thou dost suspect
That I have been disloyal to thy bed,
And that he is a bastard, not thy son:
Sweet York, sweet husband, be not of that mind:
He is as like thee as a man may be,
Not like to me, or any of my kin,
And yet I love him.
Make way, unruly woman!
Exit
After, Aumerle! mount thee upon his horse;
Spur post, and get before him to the king,
And beg thy pardon ere he do accuse thee.
Ill not be long behind; though I be old,
I doubt not but to ride as fast as York:
And never will I rise up from the ground
Till Bolingbroke have pardond thee. Away, be gone!
Exeunt
SCENE III. A royal palace.
Enter HENRY BOLINGBROKE, HENRY PERCY, and other Lords
Can no man tell me of my unthrifty son?
Tis full three months since I did see him last;
If any plague hang over us, tis he.
I would to God, my lords, he might be found:
Inquire at London, mongst the taverns there,
For there, they say, he daily doth frequent,
With unrestrained loose companions,
Even such, they say, as stand in narrow lanes,
And beat our watch, and rob our passengers;
Which he, young wanton and effeminate boy,
Takes on the point of honour to support
So dissolute a crew.
My lord, some two days since I saw the prince,
And told him of those triumphs held at Oxford.
And what said the gallant?
His answer was, he would unto the stews,
And from the commonst creature pluck a glove,
And wear it as a favour; and with that
He would unhorse the lustiest challenger.
As dissolute as desperate; yet through both
I see some sparks of better hope, which elder years
May happily bring forth. But who comes here?
Enter DUKE OF AUMERLE
Where is the king?
