Could all but answer for that peevish brat?
Can curses pierce the clouds and enter heaven?
Why, then, give way, dull clouds, to my quick curses!
If not by war, by surfeit die your king,
As ours by murder, to make him a king!
Edward thy son, which now is Prince of Wales,
For Edward my son, which was Prince of Wales,
Die in his youth by like untimely violence!
Thyself a queen, for me that was a queen,
Outlive thy glory, like my wretched self!
Long mayst thou live to wail thy childrens loss;
And see another, as I see thee now,
Deckd in thy rights, as thou art stalld in mine!
Long die thy happy days before thy death;
And, after many lengthend hours of grief,
Die neither mother, wife, nor Englands queen!
Rivers and Dorset, you were standers by,
And so wast thou, Lord Hastings, when my son
Was stabbd with bloody daggers: God, I pray him,
That none of you may live your natural age,
But by some unlookd accident cut off!
Have done thy charm, thou hateful witherd hag!
And leave out thee? stay, dog, for thou shalt hear me.
If heaven have any grievous plague in store
Exceeding those that I can wish upon thee,
O, let them keep it till thy sins be ripe,
And then hurl down their indignation
On thee, the troubler of the poor worlds peace!
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul!
Thy friends suspect for traitors while thou livest,
And take deep traitors for thy dearest friends!
No sleep close up that deadly eye of thine,
Unless it be whilst some tormenting dream
Affrights thee with a hell of ugly devils!
Thou elvish-markd, abortive, rooting hog!
Thou that wast seald in thy nativity
The slave of nature and the son of hell!
Thou slander of thy mothers heavy womb!
Thou loathed issue of thy fathers loins!
Thou rag of honour! thou detested--
Margaret.
Richard!
Ha!
I call thee not.
I cry thee mercy then, for I had thought
That thou hadst calld me all these bitter names.
Why, so I did; but lookd for no reply.
O, let me make the period to my curse!
Tis done by me, and ends in Margaret.
Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself.
Poor painted queen, vain flourish of my fortune!
Why strewst thou sugar on that bottled spider,
Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about?
Fool, fool! thou whetst a knife to kill thyself.
The time will come when thou shalt wish for me
To help thee curse that poisonous bunchbackd toad.
False-boding woman, end thy frantic curse,
Lest to thy harm thou move our patience.
Foul shame upon you! you have all moved mine.
Were you well served, you would be taught your duty.
To serve me well, you all should do me duty,
Teach me to be your queen, and you my subjects:
O, serve me well, and teach yourselves that duty!
Dispute not with her; she is lunatic.
Peace, master marquess, you are malapert:
Your fire-new stamp of honour is scarce current.
O, that your young nobility could judge
What twere to lose it, and be miserable!
They that stand high have many blasts to shake them;
And if they fall, they dash themselves to pieces.
Good counsel, marry: learn it, learn it, marquess.
It toucheth you, my lord, as much as me.
Yea, and much more: but I was born so high,
Our aery buildeth in the cedars top,
And dallies with the wind and scorns the sun.
And turns the sun to shade; alas! alas!
Witness my son, now in the shade of death;
Whose bright out-shining beams thy cloudy wrath
Hath in eternal darkness folded up.
Your aery buildeth in our aerys nest.
O God, that seest it, do not suffer it!
As it was won with blood, lost be it so!
Have done! for shame, if not for charity.
Urge neither charity nor shame to me:
Uncharitably with me have you dealt,
And shamefully by you my hopes are butcherd.
My charity is outrage, life my shame
And in that shame still live my sorrows rage.
Have done, have done.
O princely Buckingham Ill kiss thy hand,
In sign of league and amity with thee:
Now fair befal thee and thy noble house!
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood,
Nor thou within the compass of my curse.
Nor no one here; for curses never pass
The lips of those that breathe them in the air.
Ill not believe but they ascend the sky,
And there awake Gods gentle-sleeping peace.
O Buckingham, take heed of yonder dog!
Look, when he fawns, he bites; and when he bites,
His venom tooth will rankle to the death:
Have not to do with him, beware of him;
Sin, death, and hell have set their marks on him,
And all their ministers attend on him.
What doth she say, my Lord of Buckingham?
Nothing that I respect, my gracious lord.
What, dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel?
And soothe the devil that I warn thee from?
O, but remember this another day,
When he shall split thy very heart with sorrow,
And say poor Margaret was a prophetess!
Live each of you the subjects to his hate,
And he to yours, and all of you to Gods!
Exit
My hair doth stand on end to hear her curses.
And so doth mine: I muse why shes at liberty.
I cannot blame her: by Gods holy mother,
She hath had too much wrong; and I repent
My part thereof that I have done to her.
I never did her any, to my knowledge.
But you have all the vantage of her wrong.
I was too hot to do somebody good,
That is too cold in thinking of it now.
Marry, as for Clarence, he is well repaid,
He is frankd up to fatting for his pains
God pardon them that are the cause of it!
A virtuous and a Christian-like conclusion,
To pray for them that have done scathe to us.
So do I ever:
Aside
being well-advised.
For had I cursed now, I had cursed myself.
Enter CATESBY
Madam, his majesty doth call for you,
And for your grace; and you, my noble lords.
Catesby, we come. Lords, will you go with us?
Madam, we will attend your grace.
Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
I do the wrong, and first begin to brawl.
The secret mischiefs that I set abroach
I lay unto the grievous charge of others.
Clarence, whom I, indeed, have laid in darkness,
I do beweep to many simple gulls
Namely, to Hastings, Derby, Buckingham;
And say it is the queen and her allies
That stir the king against the duke my brother.
Now, they believe it; and withal whet me
To be revenged on Rivers, Vaughan, Grey:
But then I sigh; and, with a piece of scripture,
Tell them that God bids us do good for evil:
And thus I clothe my naked villany
With old odd ends stolen out of holy writ;
And seem a saint, when most I play the devil.
Enter two Murderers
But, soft! here come my executioners.
How now, my hardy, stout resolved mates!
Are you now going to dispatch this deed?
We are, my lord; and come to have the warrant
That we may be admitted where he is.
Well thought upon; I have it here about me.
Gives the warrant
When you have done, repair to Crosby Place.
But, sirs, be sudden in the execution,
Withal obdurate, do not hear him plead;
For Clarence is well-spoken, and perhaps
May move your hearts to pity if you mark him.
Tush!
Fear not, my lord, we will not stand to prate;
Talkers are no good doers: be assured
We come to use our hands and not our tongues.
Your eyes drop millstones, when fools eyes drop tears:
I like you, lads; about your business straight;
Go, go, dispatch.
We will, my noble lord.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. London. The Tower.
Enter CLARENCE and BRAKENBURY
Why looks your grace so heavily today?
O, I have passd a miserable night,
So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams,
That, as I am a Christian faithful man,
I would not spend another such a night,
Though twere to buy a world of happy days,
So full of dismal terror was the time!
What was your dream? I long to hear you tell it.
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower,
And was embarkd to cross to Burgundy;
And, in my company, my brother Gloucester;
Who from my cabin tempted me to walk
Upon the hatches: thence we looked toward England,
And cited up a thousand fearful times,
During the wars of York and Lancaster
That had befalln us. As we paced along
Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
Methought that Gloucester stumbled; and, in falling,
Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard,
Into the tumbling billows of the main.
Lord, Lord! methought, what pain it was to drown!
What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears!
What ugly sights of death within mine eyes!
Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks;
Ten thousand men that fishes gnawd upon;
Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
All scatterd in the bottom of the sea:
Some lay in dead mens skulls; and, in those holes
Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
As twere in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems,
Which wood the slimy bottom of the deep,
And mockd the dead bones that lay scatterd by.
Had you such leisure in the time of death
To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?
Methought I had; and often did I strive
To yield the ghost: but still the envious flood
Kept in my soul, and would not let it forth
To seek the empty, vast and wandering air;
But smotherd it within my panting bulk,
Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.
Awaked you not with this sore agony?
O, no, my dream was lengthend after life;
O, then began the tempest to my soul,
Who passd, methought, the melancholy flood,
With that grim ferryman which poets write of,
Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
The first that there did greet my stranger soul,
Was my great father-in-law, renowned Warwick;
Who cried aloud, What scourge for perjury
Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?
And so he vanishd: then came wandering by
A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
Dabbled in blood; and he squeakd out aloud,
Clarence is come; false, fleeting, perjured Clarence,
That stabbd me in the field by Tewksbury;
Seize on him, Furies, take him to your torments!
With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
Environd me about, and howled in mine ears
Such hideous cries, that with the very noise
I trembling waked, and for a season after
Could not believe but that I was in hell,
Such terrible impression made the dream.
No marvel, my lord, though it affrighted you;
I promise, I am afraid to hear you tell it.
O Brakenbury, I have done those things,
Which now bear evidence against my soul,
For Edwards sake; and see how he requites me!
O God! if my deep prayers cannot appease thee,
But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
Yet execute thy wrath in me alone,
O, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me;
My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest!
CLARENCE sleeps
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
Makes the night morning, and the noon-tide night.
Princes have but their tides for their glories,
An outward honour for an inward toil;
And, for unfelt imagination,
They often feel a world of restless cares:
So that, betwixt their tides and low names,
Theres nothing differs but the outward fame.
Enter the two Murderers
Ho! whos here?
In Gods name what are you, and how came you hither?
I would speak with Clarence, and I came hither on my legs.
Yea, are you so brief?
O sir, it is better to be brief than tedious. Show
him our commission; talk no more.
BRAKENBURY reads it
I am, in this, commanded to deliver
The noble Duke of Clarence to your hands:
I will not reason what is meant hereby,
Because I will be guiltless of the meaning.
Here are the keys, there sits the duke asleep:
Ill to the king; and signify to him
That thus I have resignd my charge to you.
Do so, it is a point of wisdom: fare you well.
Exit BRAKENBURY
What, shall we stab him as he sleeps?
No; then he will say twas done cowardly, when he wakes.
When he wakes! why, fool, he shall never wake till
the judgment-day.
Why, then he will say we stabbed him sleeping.
The urging of that word judgment hath bred a kind
of remorse in me.
What, art thou afraid?
Not to kill him, having a warrant for it; but to be
damned for killing him, from which no warrant can defend us.
I thought thou hadst been resolute.
So I am, to let him live.
Back to the Duke of Gloucester, tell him so.
I pray thee, stay a while: I hope my holy humour
will change; twas wont to hold me but while one
would tell twenty.
How dost thou feel thyself now?
Faith, some certain dregs of conscience are yet
within me.
Remember our reward, when the deed is done.
Zounds, he dies: I had forgot the reward.
Where is thy conscience now?
In the Duke of Gloucesters purse.
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward,
thy conscience flies out.
Let it go; theres few or none will entertain it.
How if it come to thee again?
Ill not meddle with it: it is a dangerous thing: it
makes a man a coward: a man cannot steal, but it
accuseth him; he cannot swear, but it cheques him;
he cannot lie with his neighbours wife, but it
detects him: tis a blushing shamefast spirit that
mutinies in a mans bosom; it fills one full of
obstacles: it made me once restore a purse of gold
that I found; it beggars any man that keeps it: it
is turned out of all towns and cities for a
dangerous thing; and every man that means to live
well endeavours to trust to himself and to live
without it.
Zounds, it is even now at my elbow, persuading me
not to kill the duke.
Take the devil in thy mind, and relieve him not: he
would insinuate with thee but to make thee sigh.
Tut, I am strong-framed, he cannot prevail with me,
I warrant thee.
Spoke like a tail fellow that respects his
reputation. Come, shall we to this gear?
Take him over the costard with the hilts of thy
sword, and then we will chop him in the malmsey-butt
in the next room.
O excellent devise! make a sop of him.
Hark! he stirs: shall I strike?
No, first lets reason with him.
Where art thou, keeper? give me a cup of wine.
You shall have wine enough, my lord, anon.
In Gods name, what art thou?
A man, as you are.
But not, as I am, royal.
Nor you, as we are, loyal.
Thy voice is thunder, but thy looks are humble.
My voice is now the kings, my looks mine own.
How darkly and how deadly dost thou speak!
Your eyes do menace me: why look you pale?
Who sent you hither? Wherefore do you come?
To, to, to--
To murder me?
Ay, ay.
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so,
And therefore cannot have the hearts to do it.
Wherein, my friends, have I offended you?
Offended us you have not, but the king.
I shall be reconciled to him again.
Never, my lord; therefore prepare to die.
Are you calld forth from out a world of men
To slay the innocent? What is my offence?
Where are the evidence that do accuse me?
What lawful quest have given their verdict up
Unto the frowning judge? or who pronounced
The bitter sentence of poor Clarence death?
Before I be convict by course of law,
To threaten me with death is most unlawful.
I charge you, as you hope to have redemption
By Christs dear blood shed for our grievous sins,
That you depart and lay no hands on me
The deed you undertake is damnable.
What we will do, we do upon command.
And he that hath commanded is the king.
Erroneous vassal! the great King of kings
Hath in the tables of his law commanded
That thou shalt do no murder: and wilt thou, then,
Spurn at his edict and fulfil a mans?
Take heed; for he holds vengeance in his hands,
To hurl upon their heads that break his law.
And that same vengeance doth he hurl on thee,
For false forswearing and for murder too:
Thou didst receive the holy sacrament,
To fight in quarrel of the house of Lancaster.
And, like a traitor to the name of God,
Didst break that vow; and with thy treacherous blade
Unripdst the bowels of thy sovereigns son.
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend.
How canst thou urge Gods dreadful law to us,
When thou hast broke it in so dear degree?
Alas! for whose sake did I that ill deed?
For Edward, for my brother, for his sake: Why, sirs,
He sends ye not to murder me for this
For in this sin he is as deep as I.
If God will be revenged for this deed.
O, know you yet, he doth it publicly,
Take not the quarrel from his powerful arm;
He needs no indirect nor lawless course
To cut off those that have offended him.
Who made thee, then, a bloody minister,
When gallant-springing brave Plantagenet,
That princely novice, was struck dead by thee?
My brothers love, the devil, and my rage.
Thy brothers love, our duty, and thy fault,
Provoke us hither now to slaughter thee.
Oh, if you love my brother, hate not me;
I am his brother, and I love him well.
If you be hired for meed, go back again,
And I will send you to my brother Gloucester,
Who shall reward you better for my life
Than Edward will for tidings of my death.
You are deceived, your brother Gloucester hates you.
O, no, he loves me, and he holds me dear:
Go you to him from me.
Ay, so we will.
Tell him, when that our princely father York
Blessd his three sons with his victorious arm,
And charged us from his soul to love each other,
He little thought of this divided friendship:
Bid Gloucester think of this, and he will weep.
Ay, millstones; as be lessond us to weep.
O, do not slander him, for he is kind.
Right,
As snow in harvest. Thou deceivest thyself:
Tis he that sent us hither now to slaughter thee.
It cannot be; for when I parted with him,
He huggd me in his arms, and swore, with sobs,
That he would labour my delivery.
Why, so he doth, now he delivers thee
From this worlds thraldom to the joys of heaven.
Make peace with God, for you must die, my lord.
Hast thou that holy feeling in thy soul,
To counsel me to make my peace with God,
And art thou yet to thy own soul so blind,
That thou wilt war with God by murdering me?
Ah, sirs, consider, he that set you on
To do this deed will hate you for the deed.
What shall we do?
Relent, and save your souls.
Relent! tis cowardly and womanish.
Not to relent is beastly, savage, devilish.
Which of you, if you were a princes son,
Being pent from liberty, as I am now,
if two such murderers as yourselves came to you,
Would not entreat for life?
My friend, I spy some pity in thy looks:
O, if thine eye be not a flatterer,
Come thou on my side, and entreat for me,
As you would beg, were you in my distress
A begging prince what beggar pities not?
Look behind you, my lord.
Take that, and that: if all this will not do,
Stabs him
Ill drown you in the malmsey-butt within.
Exit, with the body
A bloody deed, and desperately dispatchd!
How fain, like Pilate, would I wash my hands
Of this most grievous guilty murder done!
Re-enter First Murderer
How now! what meanst thou, that thou helpst me not?
By heavens, the duke shall know how slack thou art!
I would he knew that I had saved his brother!
Take thou the fee, and tell him what I say;
For I repent me that the duke is slain.
Exit
So do not I: go, coward as thou art.
Now must I hide his body in some hole,
Until the duke take order for his burial:
And when I have my meed, I must away;
For this will out, and here I must not stay.
ACT II
SCENE I. London. The palace.
Flourish. Enter KING EDWARD IV sick, QUEEN  ELIZABETH, DORSET, RIVERS, HASTINGS, BUCKINGHAM, GREY, and others
Why, so: now have I done a good days work:
You peers, continue this united league:
I every day expect an embassage
From my Redeemer to redeem me hence;
And now in peace my soul shall part to heaven,
Since I have set my friends at peace on earth.
Rivers and Hastings, take each others hand;
Dissemble not your hatred, swear your love.
By heaven, my heart is purged from grudging hate:
And with my hand I seal my true hearts love.
So thrive I, as I truly swear the like!
Take heed you dally not before your king;
Lest he that is the supreme King of kings
Confound your hidden falsehood, and award
Either of you to be the others end.
So prosper I, as I swear perfect love!
And I, as I love Hastings with my heart!
Madam, yourself are not exempt in this,
Nor your son Dorset, Buckingham, nor you;
You have been factious one against the other,
Wife, love Lord Hastings, let him kiss your hand;
And what you do, do it unfeignedly.
Here, Hastings; I will never more remember
Our former hatred, so thrive I and mine!
Dorset, embrace him; Hastings, love lord marquess.
This interchange of love, I here protest,
Upon my part shall be unviolable.
And so swear I, my lord
They embrace
Now, princely Buckingham, seal thou this league
With thy embracements to my wifes allies,
And make me happy in your unity.
Whenever Buckingham doth turn his hate
On you or yours,
To the Queen
but with all duteous love
Doth cherish you and yours, God punish me
With hate in those where I expect most love!
When I have most need to employ a friend,
And most assured that he is a friend
Deep, hollow, treacherous, and full of guile,
Be he unto me! this do I beg of God,
When I am cold in zeal to yours.
A pleasing cordial, princely Buckingham,
is this thy vow unto my sickly heart.
There wanteth now our brother Gloucester here,
To make the perfect period of this peace.
And, in good time, here comes the noble duke.
Enter GLOUCESTER
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen:
And, princely peers, a happy time of day!
Happy, indeed, as we have spent the day.
Brother, we done deeds of charity;
Made peace enmity, fair love of hate,
Between these swelling wrong-incensed peers.
A blessed labour, my most sovereign liege:
Amongst this princely heap, if any here,
By false intelligence, or wrong surmise,
Hold me a foe;
If I unwittingly, or in my rage,
Have aught committed that is hardly borne
By any in this presence, I desire
To reconcile me to his friendly peace:
Tis death to me to be at enmity;
I hate it, and desire all good mens love.
First, madam, I entreat true peace of you,
Which I will purchase with my duteous service;
Of you, my noble cousin Buckingham,
If ever any grudge were lodged between us;
Of you, Lord Rivers, and, Lord Grey, of you;
That without desert have frownd on me;
Dukes, earls, lords, gentlemen; indeed, of all.
I do not know that Englishman alive
With whom my soul is any jot at odds
More than the infant that is born to-night
I thank my God for my humility.
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter:
I would to God all strifes were well compounded.
My sovereign liege, I do beseech your majesty
To take our brother Clarence to your grace.
Why, madam, have I offerd love for this
To be so bouted in this royal presence?
Who knows not that the noble duke is dead?
They all start
You do him injury to scorn his corse.
Who knows not he is dead! who knows he is?
All seeing heaven, what a world is this!
Look I so pale, Lord Dorset, as the rest?
Ay, my good lord; and no one in this presence
But his red colour hath forsook his cheeks.
Is Clarence dead? the order was reversed.
But he, poor soul, by your first order died,
And that a winged Mercury did bear:
Some tardy cripple bore the countermand,
That came too lag to see him buried.
God grant that some, less noble and less loyal,
Nearer in bloody thoughts, but not in blood,
Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did,
And yet go current from suspicion!
Enter DERBY
A boon, my sovereign, for my service done!
I pray thee, peace: my soul is full of sorrow.
I will not rise, unless your highness grant.
Then speak at once what is it thou demandst.
The forfeit, sovereign, of my servants life;
Who slew to-day a righteous gentleman
Lately attendant on the Duke of Norfolk.
Have a tongue to doom my brothers death,
And shall the same give pardon to a slave?
My brother slew no man; his fault was thought,
And yet his punishment was cruel death.
Who sued to me for him? who, in my rage,
Kneeld at my feet, and bade me be advised
Who spake of brotherhood? who spake of love?
Who told me how the poor soul did forsake
The mighty Warwick, and did fight for me?
Who told me, in the field by Tewksbury
When Oxford had me down, he rescued me,
And said, Dear brother, live, and be a king?
Who told me, when we both lay in the field
Frozen almost to death, how he did lap me
Even in his own garments, and gave himself,
All thin and naked, to the numb cold night?
All this from my remembrance brutish wrath
Sinfully pluckd, and not a man of you
Had so much grace to put it in my mind.
But when your carters or your waiting-vassals
Have done a drunken slaughter, and defaced
The precious image of our dear Redeemer,
You straight are on your knees for pardon, pardon;
And I unjustly too, must grant it you
But for my brother not a man would speak,
Nor I, ungracious, speak unto myself
For him, poor soul. The proudest of you all
Have been beholding to him in his life;
Yet none of you would once plead for his life.
O God, I fear thy justice will take hold
On me, and you, and mine, and yours for this!
Come, Hastings, help me to my closet.
Oh, poor Clarence!
Exeunt some with KING EDWARD IV and QUEEN MARGARET
This is the fruit of rashness! Markd you not
How that the guilty kindred of the queen
Lookd pale when they did hear of Clarence death?
O, they did urge it still unto the king!
God will revenge it. But come, let us in,
To comfort Edward with our company.
We wait upon your grace.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The palace.
Enter the DUCHESS OF YORK, with the two children of CLARENCE
Tell me, good grandam, is our father dead?
No, boy.
Why do you wring your hands, and beat your breast,
And cry O Clarence, my unhappy son!
Why do you look on us, and shake your head,
And call us wretches, orphans, castaways
If that our noble father be alive?
My pretty cousins, you mistake me much;
I do lament the sickness of the king.
As loath to lose him, not your fathers death;
It were lost sorrow to wail one thats lost.
Then, grandam, you conclude that he is dead.
The king my uncle is to blame for this:
God will revenge it; whom I will importune
With daily prayers all to that effect.
And so will I.
Peace, children, peace! the king doth love you well:
Incapable and shallow innocents,
You cannot guess who caused your fathers death.
Grandam, we can; for my good uncle Gloucester
Told me, the king, provoked by the queen,
Devised impeachments to imprison him :
And when my uncle told me so, he wept,
And huggd me in his arm, and kindly kissd my cheek;
Bade me rely on him as on my father,
And he would love me dearly as his child.
Oh, that deceit should steal such gentle shapes,
And with a virtuous vizard hide foul guile!
He is my son; yea, and therein my shame;
Yet from my dugs he drew not this deceit.
Think you my uncle did dissemble, grandam?
Ay, boy.
I cannot think it. Hark! what noise is this?
Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH, with her hair about her ears; RIVERS, and DORSET after her
Oh, who shall hinder me to wail and weep,
To chide my fortune, and torment myself?
Ill join with black despair against my soul,
And to myself become an enemy.
What means this scene of rude impatience?
To make an act of tragic violence:
Edward, my lord, your son, our king, is dead.
Why grow the branches now the root is witherd?
Why wither not the leaves the sap being gone?
If you will live, lament; if die, be brief,
That our swift-winged souls may catch the kings;
Or, like obedient subjects, follow him
To his new kingdom of perpetual rest.
Ah, so much interest have I in thy sorrow
As I had title in thy noble husband!
I have bewept a worthy husbands death,
And lived by looking on his images:
But now two mirrors of his princely semblance
Are crackd in pieces by malignant death,
And I for comfort have but one false glass,
Which grieves me when I see my shame in him.
Thou art a widow; yet thou art a mother,
And hast the comfort of thy children left thee:
But death hath snatchd my husband from mine arms,
And pluckd two crutches from my feeble limbs,
Edward and Clarence. O, what cause have I,
Thine being but a moiety of my grief,
To overgo thy plaints and drown thy cries!
Good aunt, you wept not for our fathers death;
How can we aid you with our kindred tears?
Our fatherless distress was left unmoand;
Your widow-dolour likewise be unwept!
Give me no help in lamentation;
I am not barren to bring forth complaints
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes,
That I, being governd by the watery moon,
May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world!
Oh for my husband, for my dear lord Edward!
Oh for our father, for our dear lord Clarence!
Alas for both, both mine, Edward and Clarence!
What stay had I but Edward? and hes gone.
What stay had we but Clarence? and hes gone.
What stays had I but they? and they are gone.
Was never widow had so dear a loss!
Were never orphans had so dear a loss!
Was never mother had so dear a loss!
Alas, I am the mother of these moans!
Their woes are parcelld, mine are general.
She for an Edward weeps, and so do I;
I for a Clarence weep, so doth not she:
These babes for Clarence weep and so do I;
I for an Edward weep, so do not they:
Alas, you three, on me, threefold distressd,
Pour all your tears! I am your sorrows nurse,
And I will pamper it with lamentations.
Comfort, dear mother: God is much displeased
That you take with unthankfulness, his doing:
In common worldly things, tis calld ungrateful,
With dull unwilligness to repay a debt
Which with a bounteous hand was kindly lent;
Much more to be thus opposite with heaven,
For it requires the royal debt it lent you.
Madam, bethink you, like a careful mother,
Of the young prince your son: send straight for him
Let him be crownd; in him your comfort lives:
Drown desperate sorrow in dead Edwards grave,
And plant your joys in living Edwards throne.
Enter GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM, DERBY, HASTINGS, and RATCLIFF
Madam, have comfort: all of us have cause
To wail the dimming of our shining star;
But none can cure their harms by wailing them.
Madam, my mother, I do cry you mercy;
I did not see your grace: humbly on my knee
I crave your blessing.
God bless thee; and put meekness in thy mind,
Love, charity, obedience, and true duty!
[Aside]  Amen; and make me die a good old man!
That is the butt-end of a mothers blessing:
I marvel why her grace did leave it out.
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers,
That bear this mutual heavy load of moan,
Now cheer each other in each others love
Though we have spent our harvest of this king,
We are to reap the harvest of his son.
The broken rancour of your high-swoln hearts,
But lately splinterd, knit, and joind together,
Must gently be preserved, cherishd, and kept:
Me seemeth good, that, with some little train,
Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fetchd
Hither to London, to be crownd our king.
Why with some little train, my Lord of Buckingham?
Marry, my lord, lest, by a multitude,
The new-heald wound of malice should break out,
Which would be so much the more dangerous
By how much the estate is green and yet ungovernd:
Where every horse bears his commanding rein,
And may direct his course as please himself,
As well the fear of harm, as harm apparent,
In my opinion, ought to be prevented.
I hope the king made peace with all of us
And the compact is firm and true in me.
And so in me; and so, I think, in all:
Yet, since it is but green, it should be put
To no apparent likelihood of breach,
Which haply by much company might be urged:
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham,
That it is meet so few should fetch the prince.
And so say I.
Then be it so; and go we to determine
Who they shall be that straight shall post to Ludlow.
Madam, and you, my mother, will you go
To give your censures in this weighty business?
With all our harts.
Exeunt all but BUCKINGHAM and GLOUCESTER
My lord, whoever journeys to the Prince,
For Gods sake, let not us two be behind;
For, by the way, Ill sort occasion,
As index to the story we late talkd of,
To part the queens proud kindred from the king.
My other self, my counsels consistory,
My oracle, my prophet! My dear cousin,
I, like a child, will go by thy direction.
Towards Ludlow then, for well not stay behind.
Exeunt
SCENE III. London. A street.
Enter two Citizens meeting
Neighbour, well met: whither away so fast?
I promise you, I scarcely know myself:
Hear you the news abroad?
Ay, that the king is dead.
Bad news, byr lady; seldom comes the better:
I fear, I fear twill prove a troublous world.
Enter another Citizen
Neighbours, God speed!
Give you good morrow, sir.
Doth this news hold of good King Edwards death?
Ay, sir, it is too true; God help the while!
Then, masters, look to see a troublous world.
No, no; by Gods good grace his son shall reign.
Woe to the land thats governd by a child!
In him there is a hope of government,
That in his nonage council under him,
And in his full and ripend years himself,
No doubt, shall then and till then govern well.
So stood the state when Henry the Sixth
Was crownd in Paris but at nine months old.
Stood the state so? No, no, good friends, God wot;
For then this land was famously enrichd
With politic grave counsel; then the king
Had virtuous uncles to protect his grace.
Why, so hath this, both by the father and mother.
Better it were they all came by the father,
Or by the father there were none at all;
For emulation now, who shall be nearest,
Will touch us all too near, if God prevent not.
O, full of danger is the Duke of Gloucester!
And the queens sons and brothers haught and proud:
And were they to be ruled, and not to rule,
This sickly land might solace as before.
Come, come, we fear the worst; all shall be well.
When clouds appear, wise men put on their cloaks;
When great leaves fall, the winter is at hand;
When the sun sets, who doth not look for night?
Untimely storms make men expect a dearth.
All may be well; but, if God sort it so,
Tis more than we deserve, or I expect.
Truly, the souls of men are full of dread:
Ye cannot reason almost with a man
That looks not heavily and full of fear.
Before the times of change, still is it so:
By a divine instinct mens minds mistrust
Ensuing dangers; as by proof, we see
The waters swell before a boisterous storm.
But leave it all to God. whither away?
Marry, we were sent for to the justices.
And so was I: Ill bear you company.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. London. The palace.
Enter the ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, young YORK, QUEEN ELIZABETH, and the DUCHESS OF YORK
Last night, I hear, they lay at Northampton;
At Stony-Stratford will they be to-night:
To-morrow, or next day, they will be here.
I long with all my heart to see the prince:
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him.
But I hear, no; they say my son of York
Hath almost overtaen him in his growth.
Ay, mother; but I would not have it so.
Why, my young cousin, it is good to grow.
Grandam, one night, as we did sit at supper,
My uncle Rivers talkd how I did grow
More than my brother: Ay, quoth my uncle
Gloucester,
Small herbs have grace, great weeds do grow apace:
And since, methinks, I would not grow so fast,
Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste.
Good faith, good faith, the saying did not hold
In him that did object the same to thee;
He was the wretchedst thing when he was young,
So long a-growing and so leisurely,
That, if this rule were true, he should be gracious.
Why, madam, so, no doubt, he is.
I hope he is; but yet let mothers doubt.
Now, by my troth, if I had been rememberd,
I could have given my uncles grace a flout,
To touch his growth nearer than he touchd mine.
How, my pretty York? I pray thee, let me hear it.
Marry, they say my uncle grew so fast
That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old
Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth.
Grandam, this would have been a biting jest.
I pray thee, pretty York, who told thee this?
Grandam, his nurse.
His nurse! why, she was dead ere thou wert born.
If twere not she, I cannot tell who told me.
A parlous boy: go to, you are too shrewd.
Good madam, be not angry with the child.
Pitchers have ears.
Enter a Messenger
Here comes a messenger. What news?
Such news, my lord, as grieves me to unfold.
How fares the prince?
Well, madam, and in health.
What is thy news then?
Lord Rivers and Lord Grey are sent to Pomfret,
With them Sir Thomas Vaughan, prisoners.
Who hath committed them?
The mighty dukes
Gloucester and Buckingham.
For what offence?
The sum of all I can, I have disclosed;
Why or for what these nobles were committed
Is all unknown to me, my gracious lady.
Ay me, I see the downfall of our house!
The tiger now hath seized the gentle hind;
Insulting tyranny begins to jet
Upon the innocent and aweless throne:
Welcome, destruction, death, and massacre!
I see, as in a map, the end of all.
Accursed and unquiet wrangling days,
How many of you have mine eyes beheld!
My husband lost his life to get the crown;
And often up and down my sons were tossd,
For me to joy and weep their gain and loss:
And being seated, and domestic broils
Clean over-blown, themselves, the conquerors.
Make war upon themselves; blood against blood,
Self against self: O, preposterous
And frantic outrage, end thy damned spleen;
Or let me die, to look on death no more!
Come, come, my boy; we will to sanctuary.
Madam, farewell.
Ill go along with you.
You have no cause.
My gracious lady, go;
And thither bear your treasure and your goods.
For my part, Ill resign unto your grace
The seal I keep: and so betide to me
As well I tender you and all of yours!
Come, Ill conduct you to the sanctuary.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. London. A street.
The trumpets sound. Enter the young PRINCE EDWARD, GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM, CARDINAL, CATESBY, and others
Welcome, sweet prince, to London, to your chamber.
Welcome, dear cousin, my thoughts sovereign
The weary way hath made you melancholy.
No, uncle; but our crosses on the way
Have made it tedious, wearisome, and heavy
I want more uncles here to welcome me.
Sweet prince, the untainted virtue of your years
Hath not yet dived into the worlds deceit
Nor more can you distinguish of a man
Than of his outward show; which, God he knows,
Seldom or never jumpeth with the heart.
Those uncles which you want were dangerous;
Your grace attended to their sugard words,
But lookd not on the poison of their hearts :
God keep you from them, and from such false friends!
God keep me from false friends! but they were none.
My lord, the mayor of London comes to greet you.
Enter the Lord Mayor and his train
God bless your grace with health and happy days!
I thank you, good my lord; and thank you all.
I thought my mother, and my brother York,
Would long ere this have met us on the way
Fie, what a slug is Hastings, that he comes not
To tell us whether they will come or no!
Enter HASTINGS
And, in good time, here comes the sweating lord.
Welcome, my lord: what, will our mother come?
On what occasion, God he knows, not I,
The queen your mother, and your brother York,
Have taken sanctuary: the tender prince
Would fain have come with me to meet your grace,
But by his mother was perforce withheld.
Fie, what an indirect and peevish course
Is this of hers! Lord cardinal, will your grace
Persuade the queen to send the Duke of York
Unto his princely brother presently?
If she deny, Lord Hastings, go with him,
And from her jealous arms pluck him perforce.
My Lord of Buckingham, if my weak oratory
Can from his mother win the Duke of York,
Anon expect him here; but if she be obdurate
To mild entreaties, God in heaven forbid
We should infringe the holy privilege
Of blessed sanctuary! not for all this land
Would I be guilty of so deep a sin.
You are too senseless--obstinate, my lord,
Too ceremonious and traditional
Weigh it but with the grossness of this age,
You break not sanctuary in seizing him.
The benefit thereof is always granted
To those whose dealings have deserved the place,
And those who have the wit to claim the place:
This prince hath neither claimd it nor deserved it;
And therefore, in mine opinion, cannot have it:
Then, taking him from thence that is not there,
You break no privilege nor charter there.
Oft have I heard of sanctuary men;
But sanctuary children neer till now.
My lord, you shall oer-rule my mind for once.
Come on, Lord Hastings, will you go with me?
I go, my lord.
Good lords, make all the speedy haste you may.
Exeunt CARDINAL and HASTINGS
Say, uncle Gloucester, if our brother come,
Where shall we sojourn till our coronation?
Where it seems best unto your royal self.
If I may counsel you, some day or two
Your highness shall repose you at the Tower:
Then where you please, and shall be thought most fit
For your best health and recreation.
I do not like the Tower, of any place.
Did Julius Caesar build that place, my lord?
He did, my gracious lord, begin that place;
Which, since, succeeding ages have re-edified.
Is it upon record, or else reported
Successively from age to age, he built it?
Upon record, my gracious lord.
But say, my lord, it were not registerd,
Methinks the truth should live from age to age,
As twere retaild to all posterity,
Even to the general all-ending day.
[Aside]  So wise so young, they say, do never
live long.
What say you, uncle?
I say, without characters, fame lives long.
Aside
Thus, like the formal vice, Iniquity,
I moralize two meanings in one word.
