That Julius Caesar was a famous man;
With what his valour did enrich his wit,
His wit set down to make his valour live
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror;
For now he lives in fame, though not in life.
Ill tell you what, my cousin Buckingham,--
What, my gracious lord?
An if I live until I be a man,
Ill win our ancient right in France again,
Or die a soldier, as I lived a king.
[Aside]  Short summers lightly have a forward spring.
Enter young YORK, HASTINGS, and the CARDINAL
Now, in good time, here comes the Duke of York.
Richard of York! how fares our loving brother?
Well, my dread lord; so must I call you now.
Ay, brother, to our grief, as it is yours:
Too late he died that might have kept that title,
Which by his death hath lost much majesty.
How fares our cousin, noble Lord of York?
I thank you, gentle uncle. O, my lord,
You said that idle weeds are fast in growth
The prince my brother hath outgrown me far.
He hath, my lord.
And therefore is he idle?
O, my fair cousin, I must not say so.
Then is he more beholding to you than I.
He may command me as my sovereign;
But you have power in me as in a kinsman.
I pray you, uncle, give me this dagger.
My dagger, little cousin? with all my heart.
A beggar, brother?
Of my kind uncle, that I know will give;
And being but a toy, which is no grief to give.
A greater gift than that Ill give my cousin.
A greater gift! O, thats the sword to it.
A gentle cousin, were it light enough.
O, then, I see, you will part but with light gifts;
In weightier things youll say a beggar nay.
It is too heavy for your grace to wear.
I weigh it lightly, were it heavier.
What, would you have my weapon, little lord?
I would, that I might thank you as you call me.
How?
Little.
My Lord of York will still be cross in talk:
Uncle, your grace knows how to bear with him.
You mean, to bear me, not to bear with me:
Uncle, my brother mocks both you and me;
Because that I am little, like an ape,
He thinks that you should bear me on your shoulders.
With what a sharp-provided wit he reasons!
To mitigate the scorn he gives his uncle,
He prettily and aptly taunts himself:
So cunning and so young is wonderful.
My lord, willt please you pass along?
Myself and my good cousin Buckingham
Will to your mother, to entreat of her
To meet you at the Tower and welcome you.
What, will you go unto the Tower, my lord?
My lord protector needs will have it so.
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower.
Why, what should you fear?
Marry, my uncle Clarence angry ghost:
My grandam told me he was murdered there.
I fear no uncles dead.
Nor none that live, I hope.
An if they live, I hope I need not fear.
But come, my lord; and with a heavy heart,
Thinking on them, go I unto the Tower.
A Sennet. Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM and CATESBY
Think you, my lord, this little prating York
Was not incensed by his subtle mother
To taunt and scorn you thus opprobriously?
No doubt, no doubt; O, tis a parlous boy;
Bold, quick, ingenious, forward, capable
He is all the mothers, from the top to toe.
Well, let them rest. Come hither, Catesby.
Thou art sworn as deeply to effect what we intend
As closely to conceal what we impart:
Thou knowst our reasons urged upon the way;
What thinkst thou? is it not an easy matter
To make William Lord Hastings of our mind,
For the instalment of this noble duke
In the seat royal of this famous isle?
He for his fathers sake so loves the prince,
That he will not be won to aught against him.
What thinkst thou, then, of Stanley? what will he?
He will do all in all as Hastings doth.
Well, then, no more but this: go, gentle Catesby,
And, as it were far off sound thou Lord Hastings,
How doth he stand affected to our purpose;
And summon him to-morrow to the Tower,
To sit about the coronation.
If thou dost find him tractable to us,
Encourage him, and show him all our reasons:
If he be leaden, icy-cold, unwilling,
Be thou so too; and so break off your talk,
And give us notice of his inclination:
For we to-morrow hold divided councils,
Wherein thyself shalt highly be employd.
Commend me to Lord William: tell him, Catesby,
His ancient knot of dangerous adversaries
To-morrow are let blood at Pomfret-castle;
And bid my friend, for joy of this good news,
Give mistress Shore one gentle kiss the more.
Good Catesby, go, effect this business soundly.
My good lords both, with all the heed I may.
Shall we hear from you, Catesby, ere we sleep?
You shall, my lord.
At Crosby Place, there shall you find us both.
Exit CATESBY
Now, my lord, what shall we do, if we perceive
Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots?
Chop off his head, man; somewhat we will do:
And, look, when I am king, claim thou of me
The earldom of Hereford, and the moveables
Whereof the king my brother stood possessd.
Ill claim that promise at your graces hands.
And look to have it yielded with all willingness.
Come, let us sup betimes, that afterwards
We may digest our complots in some form.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Before Lord Hastings house.
Enter a Messenger
What, ho! my lord!
[Within]  Who knocks at the door?
A messenger from the Lord Stanley.
Enter HASTINGS
What ist oclock?
Upon the stroke of four.
Cannot thy master sleep these tedious nights?
So it should seem by that I have to say.
First, he commends him to your noble lordship.
And then?
And then he sends you word
He dreamt to-night the boar had razed his helm:
Besides, he says there are two councils held;
And that may be determined at the one
which may make you and him to rue at the other.
Therefore he sends to know your lordships pleasure,
If presently you will take horse with him,
And with all speed post with him toward the north,
To shun the danger that his soul divines.
Go, fellow, go, return unto thy lord;
Bid him not fear the separated councils
His honour and myself are at the one,
And at the other is my servant Catesby
Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us
Whereof I shall not have intelligence.
Tell him his fears are shallow, wanting instance:
And for his dreams, I wonder he is so fond
To trust the mockery of unquiet slumbers
To fly the boar before the boar pursues,
Were to incense the boar to follow us
And make pursuit where he did mean no chase.
Go, bid thy master rise and come to me
And we will both together to the Tower,
Where, he shall see, the boar will use us kindly.
My gracious lord, Ill tell him what you say.
Exit
Enter CATESBY
Many good morrows to my noble lord!
Good morrow, Catesby; you are early stirring
What news, what news, in this our tottering state?
It is a reeling world, indeed, my lord;
And I believe twill never stand upright
Tim Richard wear the garland of the realm.
How! wear the garland! dost thou mean the crown?
Ay, my good lord.
Ill have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders
Ere I will see the crown so foul misplaced.
But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it?
Ay, on my life; and hopes to find forward
Upon his party for the gain thereof:
And thereupon he sends you this good news,
That this same very day your enemies,
The kindred of the queen, must die at Pomfret.
Indeed, I am no mourner for that news,
Because they have been still mine enemies:
But, that Ill give my voice on Richards side,
To bar my masters heirs in true descent,
God knows I will not do it, to the death.
God keep your lordship in that gracious mind!
But I shall laugh at this a twelve-month hence,
That they who brought me in my masters hate
I live to look upon their tragedy.
I tell thee, Catesby--
What, my lord?
Ere a fortnight make me elder,
Ill send some packing that yet think not on it.
Tis a vile thing to die, my gracious lord,
When men are unprepared and look not for it.
O monstrous, monstrous! and so falls it out
With Rivers, Vaughan, Grey: and so twill do
With some men else, who think themselves as safe
As thou and I; who, as thou knowst, are dear
To princely Richard and to Buckingham.
The princes both make high account of you;
Aside
For they account his head upon the bridge.
I know they do; and I have well deserved it.
Enter STANLEY
Come on, come on; where is your boar-spear, man?
Fear you the boar, and go so unprovided?
My lord, good morrow; good morrow, Catesby:
You may jest on, but, by the holy rood,
I do not like these several councils, I.
My lord,
I hold my life as dear as you do yours;
And never in my life, I do protest,
Was it more precious to me than tis now:
Think you, but that I know our state secure,
I would be so triumphant as I am?
The lords at Pomfret, when they rode from London,
Were jocund, and supposed their state was sure,
And they indeed had no cause to mistrust;
But yet, you see how soon the day oercast.
This sudden stag of rancour I misdoubt:
Pray God, I say, I prove a needless coward!
What, shall we toward the Tower? the day is spent.
Come, come, have with you. Wot you what, my lord?
To-day the lords you talk of are beheaded.
They, for their truth, might better wear their heads
Than some that have accused them wear their hats.
But come, my lord, let us away.
Enter a Pursuivant
Go on before; Ill talk with this good fellow.
Exeunt STANLEY and CATESBY
How now, sirrah! how goes the world with thee?
The better that your lordship please to ask.
I tell thee, man, tis better with me now
Than when I met thee last where now we meet:
Then was I going prisoner to the Tower,
By the suggestion of the queens allies;
But now, I tell thee--keep it to thyself--
This day those enemies are put to death,
And I in better state than eer I was.
God hold it, to your honours good content!
Gramercy, fellow: there, drink that for me.
Throws him his purse
God save your lordship!
Exit
Enter a Priest
Well met, my lord; I am glad to see your honour.
I thank thee, good Sir John, with all my heart.
I am in your debt for your last exercise;
Come the next Sabbath, and I will content you.
He whispers in his ear
Enter BUCKINGHAM
What, talking with a priest, lord chamberlain?
Your friends at Pomfret, they do need the priest;
Your honour hath no shriving work in hand.
Good faith, and when I met this holy man,
Those men you talk of came into my mind.
What, go you toward the Tower?
I do, my lord; but long I shall not stay
I shall return before your lordship thence.
Tis like enough, for I stay dinner there.
[Aside]  And supper too, although thou knowst it not.
Come, will you go?
Ill wait upon your lordship.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Pomfret Castle.
Enter RATCLIFF, with halberds, carrying RIVERS, GREY, and VAUGHAN to death
Come, bring forth the prisoners.
Sir Richard Ratcliff, let me tell thee this:
To-day shalt thou behold a subject die
For truth, for duty, and for loyalty.
God keep the prince from all the pack of you!
A knot you are of damned blood-suckers!
You live that shall cry woe for this after.
Dispatch; the limit of your lives is out.
O Pomfret, Pomfret! O thou bloody prison,
Fatal and ominous to noble peers!
Within the guilty closure of thy walls
Richard the second here was hackd to death;
And, for more slander to thy dismal seat,
We give thee up our guiltless blood to drink.
Now Margarets curse is falln upon our heads,
For standing by when Richard stabbd her son.
Then cursed she Hastings, then cursed she Buckingham,
Then cursed she Richard. O, remember, God
To hear her prayers for them, as now for us
And for my sister and her princely sons,
Be satisfied, dear God, with our true blood,
Which, as thou knowst, unjustly must be spilt.
Make haste; the hour of death is expiate.
Come, Grey, come, Vaughan, let us all embrace:
And take our leave, until we meet in heaven.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The Tower of London.
Enter BUCKINGHAM, DERBY, HASTINGS, the BISHOP OF  ELY, RATCLIFF, LOVEL, with others, and take their seats at a table
My lords, at once: the cause why we are met
Is, to determine of the coronation.
In Gods name, speak: when is the royal day?
Are all things fitting for that royal time?
It is, and wants but nomination.
To-morrow, then, I judge a happy day.
Who knows the lord protectors mind herein?
Who is most inward with the royal duke?
Your grace, we think, should soonest know his mind.
Who, I, my lord I we know each others faces,
But for our hearts, he knows no more of mine,
Than I of yours;
Nor I no more of his, than you of mine.
Lord Hastings, you and he are near in love.
I thank his grace, I know he loves me well;
But, for his purpose in the coronation.
I have not sounded him, nor he deliverd
His gracious pleasure any way therein:
But you, my noble lords, may name the time;
And in the dukes behalf Ill give my voice,
Which, I presume, hell take in gentle part.
Enter GLOUCESTER
Now in good time, here comes the duke himself.
My noble lords and cousins all, good morrow.
I have been long a sleeper; but, I hope,
My absence doth neglect no great designs,
Which by my presence might have been concluded.
Had not you come upon your cue, my lord
William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part,--
I mean, your voice,--for crowning of the king.
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder;
His lordship knows me well, and loves me well.
I thank your grace.
My lord of Ely!
My lord?
When I was last in Holborn,
I saw good strawberries in your garden there
I do beseech you send for some of them.
Marry, and will, my lord, with all my heart.
Exit
Cousin of Buckingham, a word with you.
Drawing him aside
Catesby hath sounded Hastings in our business,
And finds the testy gentleman so hot,
As he will lose his head ere give consent
His masters son, as worshipful as he terms it,
Shall lose the royalty of Englands throne.
Withdraw you hence, my lord, Ill follow you.
Exit GLOUCESTER, BUCKINGHAM following
We have not yet set down this day of triumph.
To-morrow, in mine opinion, is too sudden;
For I myself am not so well provided
As else I would be, were the day prolongd.
Re-enter BISHOP OF ELY
Where is my lord protector? I have sent for these
strawberries.
His grace looks cheerfully and smooth to-day;
Theres some conceit or other likes him well,
When he doth bid good morrow with such a spirit.
I think theres never a man in Christendom
That can less hide his love or hate than he;
For by his face straight shall you know his heart.
What of his heart perceive you in his face
By any likelihood he showd to-day?
Marry, that with no man here he is offended;
For, were he, he had shown it in his looks.
I pray God he be not, I say.
Re-enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM
I pray you all, tell me what they deserve
That do conspire my death with devilish plots
Of damned witchcraft, and that have prevaild
Upon my body with their hellish charms?
The tender love I bear your grace, my lord,
Makes me most forward in this noble presence
To doom the offenders, whatsoever they be
I say, my lord, they have deserved death.
Then be your eyes the witness of this ill:
See how I am bewitchd; behold mine arm
Is, like a blasted sapling, witherd up:
And this is Edwards wife, that monstrous witch,
Consorted with that harlot strumpet Shore,
That by their witchcraft thus have marked me.
If they have done this thing, my gracious lord--
If I thou protector of this damned strumpet--
Tellest thou me of ifs?  Thou art a traitor:
Off with his head! Now, by Saint Paul I swear,
I will not dine until I see the same.
Lovel and Ratcliff, look that it be done:
The rest, that love me, rise and follow me.
Exeunt all but HASTINGS, RATCLIFF, and LOVEL
Woe, woe for England! not a whit for me;
For I, too fond, might have prevented this.
Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm;
But I disdaind it, and did scorn to fly:
Three times to-day my foot-cloth horse did stumble,
And startled, when he lookd upon the Tower,
As loath to bear me to the slaughter-house.
O, now I want the priest that spake to me:
I now repent I told the pursuivant
As twere triumphing at mine enemies,
How they at Pomfret bloodily were butcherd,
And I myself secure in grace and favour.
O Margaret, Margaret, now thy heavy curse
Is lighted on poor Hastings wretched head!
Dispatch, my lord; the duke would be at dinner:
Make a short shrift; he longs to see your head.
O momentary grace of mortal men,
Which we more hunt for than the grace of God!
Who builds his hopes in air of your good looks,
Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast,
Ready, with every nod, to tumble down
Into the fatal bowels of the deep.
Come, come, dispatch; tis bootless to exclaim.
O bloody Richard! miserable England!
I prophesy the fearfulst time to thee
That ever wretched age hath lookd upon.
Come, lead me to the block; bear him my head.
They smile at me that shortly shall be dead.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The Tower-walls.
Enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM, in rotten armour, marvellous ill-favoured
Come, cousin, canst thou quake, and change thy colour,
Murder thy breath in the middle of a word,
And then begin again, and stop again,
As if thou wert distraught and mad with terror?
Tut, I can counterfeit the deep tragedian;
Speak and look back, and pry on every side,
Tremble and start at wagging of a straw,
Intending deep suspicion: ghastly looks
Are at my service, like enforced smiles;
And both are ready in their offices,
At any time, to grace my stratagems.
But what, is Catesby gone?
He is; and, see, he brings the mayor along.
Enter the Lord Mayor and CATESBY
Lord mayor,--
Look to the drawbridge there!
Hark! a drum.
Catesby, oerlook the walls.
Lord mayor, the reason we have sent--
Look back, defend thee, here are enemies.
God and our innocency defend and guard us!
Be patient, they are friends, Ratcliff and Lovel.
Enter LOVEL and RATCLIFF, with HASTINGS head
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor,
The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings.
So dear I loved the man, that I must weep.
I took him for the plainest harmless creature
That breathed upon this earth a Christian;
Made him my book wherein my soul recorded
The history of all her secret thoughts:
So smooth he daubd his vice with show of virtue,
That, his apparent open guilt omitted,
I mean, his conversation with Shores wife,
He lived from all attainder of suspect.
Well, well, he was the covertst shelterd traitor
That ever lived.
Would you imagine, or almost believe,
Weret not that, by great preservation,
We live to tell it you, the subtle traitor
This day had plotted, in the council-house
To murder me and my good Lord of Gloucester?
What, had he so?
What, think You we are Turks or infidels?
Or that we would, against the form of law,
Proceed thus rashly to the villains death,
But that the extreme peril of the case,
The peace of England and our persons safety,
Enforced us to this execution?
Now, fair befall you! he deserved his death;
And you my good lords, both have well proceeded,
To warn false traitors from the like attempts.
I never lookd for better at his hands,
After he once fell in with Mistress Shore.
Yet had not we determined he should die,
Until your lordship came to see his death;
Which now the loving haste of these our friends,
Somewhat against our meaning, have prevented:
Because, my lord, we would have had you heard
The traitor speak, and timorously confess
The manner and the purpose of his treason;
That you might well have signified the same
Unto the citizens, who haply may
Misconstrue us in him and wail his death.
But, my good lord, your graces word shall serve,
As well as I had seen and heard him speak
And doubt you not, right noble princes both,
But Ill acquaint our duteous citizens
With all your just proceedings in this cause.
And to that end we wishd your lord-ship here,
To avoid the carping censures of the world.
But since you come too late of our intents,
Yet witness what you hear we did intend:
And so, my good lord mayor, we bid farewell.
Exit Lord Mayor
Go, after, after, cousin Buckingham.
The mayor towards Guildhall hies him in all post:
There, at your meetst advantage of the time,
Infer the bastardy of Edwards children:
Tell them how Edward put to death a citizen,
Only for saying he would make his son
Heir to the crown; meaning indeed his house,
Which, by the sign thereof was termed so.
Moreover, urge his hateful luxury
And bestial appetite in change of lust;
Which stretched to their servants, daughters, wives,
Even where his lustful eye or savage heart,
Without control, listed to make his prey.
Nay, for a need, thus far come near my person:
Tell them, when that my mother went with child
Of that unsatiate Edward, noble York
My princely father then had wars in France
And, by just computation of the time,
Found that the issue was not his begot;
Which well appeared in his lineaments,
Being nothing like the noble duke my father:
But touch this sparingly, as twere far off,
Because you know, my lord, my mother lives.
Fear not, my lord, Ill play the orator
As if the golden fee for which I plead
Were for myself: and so, my lord, adieu.
If you thrive well, bring them to Baynards Castle;
Where you shall find me well accompanied
With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops.
I go: and towards three or four oclock
Look for the news that the Guildhall affords.
Exit BUCKINGHAM
Go, Lovel, with all speed to Doctor Shaw;
To CATESBY
Go thou to Friar Penker; bid them both
Meet me within this hour at Baynards Castle.
Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER
Now will I in, to take some privy order,
To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight;
And to give notice, that no manner of person
At any time have recourse unto the princes.
Exit
SCENE VI. The same.
Enter a Scrivener, with a paper in his hand
This is the indictment of the good Lord Hastings;
Which in a set hand fairly is engrossd,
That it may be this day read over in Pauls.
And mark how well the sequel hangs together:
Eleven hours I spent to write it over,
For yesternight by Catesby was it brought me;
The precedent was full as long a-doing:
And yet within these five hours lived Lord Hastings,
Untainted, unexamined, free, at liberty
Heres a good world the while! Why whos so gross,
That seeth not this palpable device?
Yet whos so blind, but says he sees it not?
Bad is the world; and all will come to nought,
When such bad dealings must be seen in thought.
Exit
SCENE VII. Baynards Castle.
Enter GLOUCESTER and BUCKINGHAM, at several doors
How now, my lord, what say the citizens?
Now, by the holy mother of our Lord,
The citizens are mum and speak not a word.
Touchd you the bastardy of Edwards children?
I did; with his contract with Lady Lucy,
And his contract by deputy in France;
The insatiate greediness of his desires,
And his enforcement of the city wives;
His tyranny for trifles; his own bastardy,
As being got, your father then in France,
His resemblance, being not like the duke;
Withal I did infer your lineaments,
Being the right idea of your father,
Both in your form and nobleness of mind;
Laid open all your victories in Scotland,
Your dicipline in war, wisdom in peace,
Your bounty, virtue, fair humility:
Indeed, left nothing fitting for the purpose
Untouchd, or slightly handled, in discourse
And when mine oratory grew to an end
I bid them that did love their countrys good
Cry God save Richard, Englands royal king!
Ah! and did they so?
No, so God help me, they spake not a word;
But, like dumb statues or breathing stones,
Gazed each on other, and lookd deadly pale.
Which when I saw, I reprehended them;
And askd the mayor what meant this wilful silence:
His answer was, the people were not wont
To be spoke to but by the recorder.
Then he was urged to tell my tale again,
Thus saith the duke, thus hath the duke inferrd;
But nothing spake in warrant from himself.
When he had done, some followers of mine own,
At the lower end of the hall, hurld up their caps,
And some ten voices cried God save King Richard!
And thus I took the vantage of those few,
Thanks, gentle citizens and friends, quoth I;
This general applause and loving shout
Argues your wisdoms and your love to Richard:
And even here brake off, and came away.
What tongueless blocks were they! would not they speak?
No, by my troth, my lord.
Will not the mayor then and his brethren come?
The mayor is here at hand: intend some fear;
Be not you spoke with, but by mighty suit:
And look you get a prayer-book in your hand,
And stand betwixt two churchmen, good my lord;
For on that ground Ill build a holy descant:
And be not easily won to our request:
Play the maids part, still answer nay, and take it.
I go; and if you plead as well for them
As I can say nay to thee for myself,
No doubt well bring it to a happy issue.
Go, go, up to the leads; the lord mayor knocks.
Exit GLOUCESTER
Enter the Lord Mayor and Citizens
Welcome my lord; I dance attendance here;
I think the duke will not be spoke withal.
Enter CATESBY
Here comes his servant: how now, Catesby,
What says he?
My lord: he doth entreat your grace;
To visit him to-morrow or next day:
He is within, with two right reverend fathers,
Divinely bent to meditation;
And no worldly suit would he be moved,
To draw him from his holy exercise.
Return, good Catesby, to thy lord again;
Tell him, myself, the mayor and citizens,
In deep designs and matters of great moment,
No less importing than our general good,
Are come to have some conference with his grace.
Ill tell him what you say, my lord.
Exit
Ah, ha, my lord, this prince is not an Edward!
He is not lolling on a lewd day-bed,
But on his knees at meditation;
Not dallying with a brace of courtezans,
But meditating with two deep divines;
Not sleeping, to engross his idle body,
But praying, to enrich his watchful soul:
Happy were England, would this gracious prince
Take on himself the sovereignty thereof:
But, sure, I fear, we shall neer win him to it.
Marry, God forbid his grace should say us nay!
I fear he will.
Re-enter CATESBY
How now, Catesby, what says your lord?
My lord,
He wonders to what end you have assembled
Such troops of citizens to speak with him,
His grace not being warnd thereof before:
My lord, he fears you mean no good to him.
Sorry I am my noble cousin should
Suspect me, that I mean no good to him:
By heaven, I come in perfect love to him;
And so once more return and tell his grace.
Exit CATESBY
When holy and devout religious men
Are at their beads, tis hard to draw them thence,
So sweet is zealous contemplation.
Enter GLOUCESTER aloft, between two Bishops. CATESBY returns
See, where he stands between two clergymen!
Two props of virtue for a Christian prince,
To stay him from the fall of vanity:
And, see, a book of prayer in his hand,
True ornaments to know a holy man.
Famous Plantagenet, most gracious prince,
Lend favourable ears to our request;
And pardon us the interruption
Of thy devotion and right Christian zeal.
My lord, there needs no such apology:
I rather do beseech you pardon me,
Who, earnest in the service of my God,
Neglect the visitation of my friends.
But, leaving this, what is your graces pleasure?
Even that, I hope, which pleaseth God above,
And all good men of this ungovernd isle.
I do suspect I have done some offence
That seems disgracious in the citys eyes,
And that you come to reprehend my ignorance.
You have, my lord: would it might please your grace,
At our entreaties, to amend that fault!
Else wherefore breathe I in a Christian land?
Then know, it is your fault that you resign
The supreme seat, the throne majestical,
The scepterd office of your ancestors,
Your state of fortune and your due of birth,
The lineal glory of your royal house,
To the corruption of a blemished stock:
Whilst, in the mildness of your sleepy thoughts,
Which here we waken to our countrys good,
This noble isle doth want her proper limbs;
Her face defaced with scars of infamy,
Her royal stock graft with ignoble plants,
And almost shoulderd in the swallowing gulf
Of blind forgetfulness and dark oblivion.
Which to recure, we heartily solicit
Your gracious self to take on you the charge
And kingly government of this your land,
Not as protector, steward, substitute,
Or lowly factor for anothers gain;
But as successively from blood to blood,
Your right of birth, your empery, your own.
For this, consorted with the citizens,
Your very worshipful and loving friends,
And by their vehement instigation,
In this just suit come I to move your grace.
I know not whether to depart in silence,
Or bitterly to speak in your reproof.
Best fitteth my degree or your condition
If not to answer, you might haply think
Tongue-tied ambition, not replying, yielded
To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty,
Which fondly you would here impose on me;
If to reprove you for this suit of yours,
So seasond with your faithful love to me.
Then, on the other side, I chequed my friends.
Therefore, to speak, and to avoid the first,
And then, in speaking, not to incur the last,
Definitively thus I answer you.
Your love deserves my thanks; but my desert
Unmeritable shuns your high request.
First if all obstacles were cut away,
And that my path were even to the crown,
As my ripe revenue and due by birth
Yet so much is my poverty of spirit,
So mighty and so many my defects,
As I had rather hide me from my greatness,
Being a bark to brook no mighty sea,
Than in my greatness covet to be hid,
And in the vapour of my glory smotherd.
But, God be thankd, theres no need of me,
And much I need to help you, if need were;
The royal tree hath left us royal fruit,
Which, mellowd by the stealing hours of time,
Will well become the seat of majesty,
And make, no doubt, us happy by his reign.
On him I lay what you would lay on me,
The right and fortune of his happy stars;
Which God defend that I should wring from him!
My lord, this argues conscience in your grace;
But the respects thereof are nice and trivial,
All circumstances well considered.
You say that Edward is your brothers son:
So say we too, but not by Edwards wife;
For first he was contract to Lady Lucy--
Your mother lives a witness to that vow--
And afterward by substitute betrothd
To Bona, sister to the King of France.
These both put by a poor petitioner,
A care-crazed mother of a many children,
A beauty-waning and distressed widow,
Even in the afternoon of her best days,
Made prize and purchase of his lustful eye,
Seduced the pitch and height of all his thoughts
To base declension and loathed bigamy
By her, in his unlawful bed, he got
This Edward, whom our manners term the prince.
More bitterly could I expostulate,
Save that, for reverence to some alive,
I give a sparing limit to my tongue.
Then, good my lord, take to your royal self
This profferd benefit of dignity;
If non to bless us and the land withal,
Yet to draw forth your noble ancestry
From the corruption of abusing times,
Unto a lineal true-derived course.
Do, good my lord, your citizens entreat you.
Refuse not, mighty lord, this profferd love.
O, make them joyful, grant their lawful suit!
Alas, why would you heap these cares on me?
I am unfit for state and majesty;
I do beseech you, take it not amiss;
I cannot nor I will not yield to you.
If you refuse it,--as, in love and zeal,
Loath to depose the child, Your brothers son;
As well we know your tenderness of heart
And gentle, kind, effeminate remorse,
Which we have noted in you to your kin,
And egally indeed to all estates,--
Yet whether you accept our suit or no,
Your brothers son shall never reign our king;
But we will plant some other in the throne,
To the disgrace and downfall of your house:
And in this resolution here we leave you.--
Come, citizens: zounds! Ill entreat no more.
O, do not swear, my lord of Buckingham.
Exit BUCKINGHAM with the Citizens
Call them again, my lord, and accept their suit.
Do, good my lord, lest all the land do rue it.
Would you enforce me to a world of care?
Well, call them again. I am not made of stone,
But penetrable to your. kind entreats,
Albeit against my conscience and my soul.
Re-enter BUCKINGHAM and the rest
Cousin of Buckingham, and you sage, grave men,
Since you will buckle fortune on my back,
To bear her burthen, whether I will or no,
I must have patience to endure the load:
But if black scandal or foul-faced reproach
Attend the sequel of your imposition,
Your mere enforcement shall acquittance me
From all the impure blots and stains thereof;
For God he knows, and you may partly see,
How far I am from the desire thereof.
God bless your grace! we see it, and will say it.
In saying so, you shall but say the truth.
Then I salute you with this kingly title:
Long live Richard, Englands royal king!
Amen.
To-morrow will it please you to be crownd?
Even when you please, since you will have it so.
To-morrow, then, we will attend your grace:
And so most joyfully we take our leave.
Come, let us to our holy task again.
Farewell, good cousin; farewell, gentle friends.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Before the Tower.
Enter, on one side, QUEEN ELIZABETH, DUCHESS OF  YORK, and DORSET; on the other, ANNE, Duchess of  Gloucester, leading Lady Margaret Plantagenet, CLARENCEs young Daughter
Who m eets us here?  my niece Plantagenet
Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester?
Now, for my life, shes wandering to the Tower,
On pure hearts love to greet the tender princes.
Daughter, well met.
God give your graces both
A happy and a joyful time of day!
As much to you, good sister! Whither away?
No farther than the Tower; and, as I guess,
Upon the like devotion as yourselves,
To gratulate the gentle princes there.
Kind sister, thanks: well enter all together.
Enter BRAKENBURY
And, in good time, here the lieutenant comes.
Master lieutenant, pray you, by your leave,
How doth the prince, and my young son of York?
Right well, dear madam. By your patience,
I may not suffer you to visit them;
The king hath straitly charged the contrary.
The king! why, whos that?
I cry you mercy: I mean the lord protector.
The Lord protect him from that kingly title!
Hath he set bounds betwixt their love and me?
I am their mother; who should keep me from them?
I am their fathers mother; I will see them.
Their aunt I am in law, in love their mother:
Then bring me to their sights; Ill bear thy blame
And take thy office from thee, on my peril.
No, madam, no; I may not leave it so:
I am bound by oath, and therefore pardon me.
Exit
Enter LORD STANLEY
Let me but meet you, ladies, one hour hence,
And Ill salute your grace of York as mother,
And reverend looker on, of two fair queens.
To LADY ANNE
Come, madam, you must straight to Westminster,
There to be crowned Richards royal queen.
O, cut my lace in sunder, that my pent heart
May have some scope to beat, or else I swoon
With this dead-killing news!
Despiteful tidings! O unpleasing news!
Be of good cheer: mother, how fares your grace?
O Dorset, speak not to me, get thee hence!
Death and destruction dog thee at the heels;
Thy mothers name is ominous to children.
If thou wilt outstrip death, go cross the seas,
And live with Richmond, from the reach of hell
Go, hie thee, hie thee from this slaughter-house,
Lest thou increase the number of the dead;
And make me die the thrall of Margarets curse,
Nor mother, wife, nor Englands counted queen.
Full of wise care is this your counsel, madam.
Take all the swift advantage of the hours;
You shall have letters from me to my son
To meet you on the way, and welcome you.
Be not taen tardy by unwise delay.
O ill-dispersing wind of misery!
O my accursed womb, the bed of death!
A cockatrice hast thou hatchd to the world,
Whose unavoided eye is murderous.
Come, madam, come; I in all haste was sent.
And I in all unwillingness will go.
I would to God that the inclusive verge
Of golden metal that must round my brow
Were red-hot steel, to sear me to the brain!
Anointed let me be with deadly venom,
And die, ere men can say, God save the queen!
Go, go, poor soul, I envy not thy glory
To feed my humour, wish thyself no harm.
No! why?  When he that is my husband now
Came to me, as I followd Henrys corse,
When scarce the blood was well washd from his hands
Which issued from my other angel husband
And that dead saint which then I weeping followd;
O, when, I say, I lookd on Richards face,
This was my wish: Be thou, quoth I,  accursed,
For making me, so young, so old a widow!
And, when thou wedst, let sorrow haunt thy bed;
And be thy wife--if any be so mad--
As miserable by the life of thee
As thou hast made me by my dear lords death!
Lo, ere I can repeat this curse again,
Even in so short a space, my womans heart
Grossly grew captive to his honey words
And proved the subject of my own souls curse,
Which ever since hath kept my eyes from rest;
For never yet one hour in his bed
Have I enjoyd the golden dew of sleep,
But have been waked by his timorous dreams.
Besides, he hates me for my father Warwick;
And will, no doubt, shortly be rid of me.
Poor heart, adieu! I pity thy complaining.
No more than from my soul I mourn for yours.
Farewell, thou woful welcomer of glory!
Adieu, poor soul, that takest thy leave of it!
[To DORSET]
Go thou to Richmond, and good fortune guide thee!
To LADY ANNE
Go thou to Richard, and good angels guard thee!
To QUEEN ELIZABETH
Go thou to sanctuary, and good thoughts possess thee!
I to my grave, where peace and rest lie with me!
Eighty odd years of sorrow have I seen,
And each hours joy wrecked with a week of teen.
Stay, yet look back with me unto the Tower.
Pity, you ancient stones, those tender babes
Whom envy hath immured within your walls!
Rough cradle for such little pretty ones!
Rude ragged nurse, old sullen playfellow
For tender princes, use my babies well!
So foolish sorrow bids your stones farewell.
Exeunt
SCENE II. London. The palace.
Sennet. Enter KING RICHARD III, in pomp, crowned; BUCKINGHAM, CATESBY, a page, and others
Stand all apart Cousin of Buckingham!
My gracious sovereign?
Give me thy hand.
Here he ascendeth his throne
Thus high, by thy advice
And thy assistance, is King Richard seated;
But shall we wear these honours for a day?
Or shall they last, and we rejoice in them?
Still live they and for ever may they last!
O Buckingham, now do I play the touch,
To try if thou be current gold indeed
Young Edward lives: think now what I would say.
Say on, my loving lord.
Why, Buckingham, I say, I would be king,
Why, so you are, my thrice renowned liege.
Ha! am I king? tis so: but Edward lives.
True, noble prince.
O bitter consequence,
That Edward still should live! True, noble prince!
Cousin, thou wert not wont to be so dull:
Shall I be plain? I wish the bastards dead;
And I would have it suddenly performd.
What sayest thou? speak suddenly; be brief.
Your grace may do your pleasure.
Tut, tut, thou art all ice, thy kindness freezeth:
Say, have I thy consent that they shall die?
Give me some breath, some little pause, my lord
Before I positively herein:
I will resolve your grace immediately.
Exit
[Aside to a stander by]
The king is angry: see, he bites the lip.
I will converse with iron-witted fools
And unrespective boys: none are for me
That look into me with considerate eyes:
High-reaching Buckingham grows circumspect.
Boy!
My lord?
Knowst thou not any whom corrupting gold
Would tempt unto a close exploit of death?
My lord, I know a discontented gentleman,
Whose humble means match not his haughty mind:
Gold were as good as twenty orators,
And will, no doubt, tempt him to any thing.
What is his name?
His name, my lord, is Tyrrel.
I partly know the man: go, call him hither.
Exit Page
The deep-revolving witty Buckingham
No more shall be the neighbour to my counsel:
Hath he so long held out with me untired,
And stops he now for breath?
Enter STANLEY
How now! what news with you?
My lord, I hear the Marquis Dorsets fled
To Richmond, in those parts beyond the sea
Where he abides.
Stands apart
Catesby!
My lord?
Rumour it abroad
That Anne, my wife, is sick and like to die:
I will take order for her keeping close.
Inquire me out some mean-born gentleman,
Whom I will marry straight to Clarence daughter:
The boy is foolish, and I fear not him.
Look, how thou dreamst! I say again, give out
That Anne my wife is sick and like to die:
About it; for it stands me much upon,
To stop all hopes whose growth may damage me.
Exit CATESBY
I must be married to my brothers daughter,
Or else my kingdom stands on brittle glass.
Murder her brothers, and then marry her!
Uncertain way of gain! But I am in
