So far in blood that sin will pluck on sin:
Tear-falling pity dwells not in this eye.
Re-enter Page, with TYRREL
Is thy name Tyrrel?
James Tyrrel, and your most obedient subject.
Art thou, indeed?
Prove me, my gracious sovereign.
Darest thou resolve to kill a friend of mine?
Ay, my lord;
But I had rather kill two enemies.
Why, there thou hast it: two deep enemies,
Foes to my rest and my sweet sleeps disturbers
Are they that I would have thee deal upon:
Tyrrel, I mean those bastards in the Tower.
Let me have open means to come to them,
And soon Ill rid you from the fear of them.
Thou singst sweet music. Hark, come hither, Tyrrel
Go, by this token: rise, and lend thine ear:
Whispers
There is no more but so: say it is done,
And I will love thee, and prefer thee too.
Tis done, my gracious lord.
Shall we hear from thee, Tyrrel, ere we sleep?
Ye shall, my Lord.
Exit
Re-enter BUCKINGHAM
My Lord, I have considerd in my mind
The late demand that you did sound me in.
Well, let that pass. Dorset is fled to Richmond.
I hear that news, my lord.
Stanley, he is your wifes son well, look to it.
My lord, I claim your gift, my due by promise,
For which your honour and your faith is pawnd;
The earldom of Hereford and the moveables
The which you promised I should possess.
Stanley, look to your wife; if she convey
Letters to Richmond, you shall answer it.
What says your highness to my just demand?
As I remember, Henry the Sixth
Did prophesy that Richmond should be king,
When Richmond was a little peevish boy.
A king, perhaps, perhaps,--
My lord!
How chance the prophet could not at that time
Have told me, I being by, that I should kill him?
My lord, your promise for the earldom,--
Richmond! When last I was at Exeter,
The mayor in courtesy showd me the castle,
And calld it Rougemont: at which name I started,
Because a bard of Ireland told me once
I should not live long after I saw Richmond.
My Lord!
Ay, whats oclock?
I am thus bold to put your grace in mind
Of what you promised me.
Well, but whats oclock?
Upon the stroke of ten.
Well, let it strike.
Why let it strike?
Because that, like a Jack, thou keepst the stroke
Betwixt thy begging and my meditation.
I am not in the giving vein to-day.
Why, then resolve me whether you will or no.
Tut, tut,
Thou troublest me; am not in the vein.
Exeunt all but BUCKINGHAM
Is it even so? rewards he my true service
With such deep contempt made I him king for this?
O, let me think on Hastings, and be gone
To Brecknock, while my fearful head is on!
Exit
SCENE III. The same.
Enter TYRREL
The tyrannous and bloody deed is done.
The most arch of piteous massacre
That ever yet this land was guilty of.
Dighton and Forrest, whom I did suborn
To do this ruthless piece of butchery,
Although they were fleshd villains, bloody dogs,
Melting with tenderness and kind compassion
Wept like two children in their deaths sad stories.
Lo, thus quoth Dighton, lay those tender babes:
Thus, thus, quoth Forrest, girdling one another
Within their innocent alabaster arms:
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk,
Which in their summer beauty kissd each other.
A book of prayers on their pillow lay;
Which once, quoth Forrest, almost changed my mind;
But O! the devil--there the villain stoppd
Whilst Dighton thus told on: We smothered
The most replenished sweet work of nature,
That from the prime creation eer she framed.
Thus both are gone with conscience and remorse;
They could not speak; and so I left them both,
To bring this tidings to the bloody king.
And here he comes.
Enter KING RICHARD III
All hail, my sovereign liege!
Kind Tyrrel, am I happy in thy news?
If to have done the thing you gave in charge
Beget your happiness, be happy then,
For it is done, my lord.
But didst thou see them dead?
I did, my lord.
And buried, gentle Tyrrel?
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them;
But how or in what place I do not know.
Come to me, Tyrrel, soon at after supper,
And thou shalt tell the process of their death.
Meantime, but think how I may do thee good,
And be inheritor of thy desire.
Farewell till soon.
Exit TYRREL
The son of Clarence have I pent up close;
His daughter meanly have I matchd in marriage;
The sons of Edward sleep in Abrahams bosom,
And Anne my wife hath bid the world good night.
Now, for I know the Breton Richmond aims
At young Elizabeth, my brothers daughter,
And, by that knot, looks proudly oer the crown,
To her I go, a jolly thriving wooer.
Enter CATESBY
My lord!
Good news or bad, that thou comest in so bluntly?
Bad news, my lord: Ely is fled to Richmond;
And Buckingham, backd with the hardy Welshmen,
Is in the field, and still his power increaseth.
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near
Than Buckingham and his rash-levied army.
Come, I have heard that fearful commenting
Is leaden servitor to dull delay;
Delay leads impotent and snail-paced beggary
Then fiery expedition be my wing,
Joves Mercury, and herald for a king!
Come, muster men: my counsel is my shield;
We must be brief when traitors brave the field.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Before the palace.
Enter QUEEN MARGARET
So, now prosperity begins to mellow
And drop into the rotten mouth of death.
Here in these confines slily have I lurkd,
To watch the waning of mine adversaries.
A dire induction am I witness to,
And will to France, hoping the consequence
Will prove as bitter, black, and tragical.
Withdraw thee, wretched Margaret: who comes here?
Enter QUEEN ELIZABETH and the DUCHESS OF YORK
Ah, my young princes! ah, my tender babes!
My unblown flowers, new-appearing sweets!
If yet your gentle souls fly in the air
And be not fixd in doom perpetual,
Hover about me with your airy wings
And hear your mothers lamentation!
Hover about her; say, that right for right
Hath dimmd your infant morn to aged night.
So many miseries have crazed my voice,
That my woe-wearied tongue is mute and dumb,
Edward Plantagenet, why art thou dead?
Plantagenet doth quit Plantagenet.
Edward for Edward pays a dying debt.
Wilt thou, O God, fly from such gentle lambs,
And throw them in the entrails of the wolf?
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done?
When holy Harry died, and my sweet son.
Blind sight, dead life, poor mortal living ghost,
Woes scene, worlds shame, graves due by life usurpd,
Brief abstract and record of tedious days,
Rest thy unrest on Englands lawful earth,
Sitting down
Unlawfully made drunk with innocents blood!
O, that thou wouldst as well afford a grave
As thou canst yield a melancholy seat!
Then would I hide my bones, not rest them here.
O, who hath any cause to mourn but I?
Sitting down by her
If ancient sorrow be most reverend,
Give mine the benefit of seniory,
And let my woes frown on the upper hand.
If sorrow can admit society,
Sitting down with them
Tell oer your woes again by viewing mine:
I had an Edward, till a Richard killd him;
I had a Harry, till a Richard killd him:
Thou hadst an Edward, till a Richard killd him;
Thou hadst a Richard, till a Richard killed him;
I had a Richard too, and thou didst kill him;
I had a Rutland too, thou holpst to kill him.
Thou hadst a Clarence too, and Richard killd him.
From forth the kennel of thy womb hath crept
A hell-hound that doth hunt us all to death:
That dog, that had his teeth before his eyes,
To worry lambs and lap their gentle blood,
That foul defacer of Gods handiwork,
That excellent grand tyrant of the earth,
That reigns in galled eyes of weeping souls,
Thy womb let loose, to chase us to our graves.
O upright, just, and true-disposing God,
How do I thank thee, that this carnal cur
Preys on the issue of his mothers body,
And makes her pew-fellow with others moan!
O Harrys wife, triumph not in my woes!
God witness with me, I have wept for thine.
Bear with me; I am hungry for revenge,
And now I cloy me with beholding it.
Thy Edward he is dead, that stabbd my Edward:
Thy other Edward dead, to quit my Edward;
Young York he is but boot, because both they
Match not the high perfection of my loss:
Thy Clarence he is dead that killd my Edward;
And the beholders of this tragic play,
The adulterate Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey,
Untimely smotherd in their dusky graves.
Richard yet lives, hells black intelligencer,
Only reserved their factor, to buy souls
And send them thither: but at hand, at hand,
Ensues his piteous and unpitied end:
Earth gapes, hell burns, fiends roar, saints pray.
To have him suddenly conveyd away.
Cancel his bond of life, dear God, I prey,
That I may live to say, The dog is dead!
O, thou didst prophesy the time would come
That I should wish for thee to help me curse
That bottled spider, that foul bunch-backd toad!
I calld thee then vain flourish of my fortune;
I calld thee then poor shadow, painted queen;
The presentation of but what I was;
The flattering index of a direful pageant;
One heaved a-high, to be hurld down below;
A mother only mockd with two sweet babes;
A dream of what thou wert, a breath, a bubble,
A sign of dignity, a garish flag,
To be the aim of every dangerous shot,
A queen in jest, only to fill the scene.
Where is thy husband now? where be thy brothers?
Where are thy children? wherein dost thou, joy?
Who sues to thee and cries God save the queen?
Where be the bending peers that flatterd thee?
Where be the thronging troops that followd thee?
Decline all this, and see what now thou art:
For happy wife, a most distressed widow;
For joyful mother, one that wails the name;
For queen, a very caitiff crownd with care;
For one being sued to, one that humbly sues;
For one that scornd at me, now scornd of me;
For one being feard of all, now fearing one;
For one commanding all, obeyd of none.
Thus hath the course of justice wheeld about,
And left thee but a very prey to time;
Having no more but thought of what thou wert,
To torture thee the more, being what thou art.
Thou didst usurp my place, and dost thou not
Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow?
Now thy proud neck bears half my burthend yoke;
From which even here I slip my weary neck,
And leave the burthen of it all on thee.
Farewell, Yorks wife, and queen of sad mischance:
These English woes will make me smile in France.
O thou well skilld in curses, stay awhile,
And teach me how to curse mine enemies!
Forbear to sleep the nights, and fast the days;
Compare dead happiness with living woe;
Think that thy babes were fairer than they were,
And he that slew them fouler than he is:
Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse:
Revolving this will teach thee how to curse.
My words are dull; O, quicken them with thine!
Thy woes will make them sharp, and pierce like mine.
Exit
Why should calamity be full of words?
Windy attorneys to their client woes,
Airy succeeders of intestate joys,
Poor breathing orators of miseries!
Let them have scope: though what they do impart
Help not all, yet do they ease the heart.
If so, then be not tongue-tied: go with me.
And in the breath of bitter words lets smother
My damned son, which thy two sweet sons smotherd.
I hear his drum: be copious in exclaims.
Enter KING RICHARD III, marching, with drums and trumpets
Who intercepts my expedition?
O, she that might have intercepted thee,
By strangling thee in her accursed womb
From all the slaughters, wretch, that thou hast done!
Hidest thou that forehead with a golden crown,
Where should be graven, if that right were right,
The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown,
And the dire death of my two sons and brothers?
Tell me, thou villain slave, where are my children?
Thou toad, thou toad, where is thy brother Clarence?
And little Ned Plantagenet, his son?
Where is kind Hastings, Rivers, Vaughan, Grey?
A flourish, trumpets! strike alarum, drums!
Let not the heavens hear these tell-tale women
Rail on the Lords enointed: strike, I say!
Flourish. Alarums
Either be patient, and entreat me fair,
Or with the clamorous report of war
Thus will I drown your exclamations.
Art thou my son?
Ay, I thank God, my father, and yourself.
Then patiently hear my impatience.
Madam, I have a touch of your condition,
Which cannot brook the accent of reproof.
O, let me speak!
Do then: but Ill not hear.
I will be mild and gentle in my speech.
And brief, good mother; for I am in haste.
Art thou so hasty? I have stayd for thee,
God knows, in anguish, pain and agony.
And came I not at last to comfort you?
No, by the holy rood, thou knowst it well,
Thou camest on earth to make the earth my hell.
A grievous burthen was thy birth to me;
Tetchy and wayward was thy infancy;
Thy school-days frightful, desperate, wild, and furious,
Thy prime of manhood daring, bold, and venturous,
Thy age confirmd, proud, subdued, bloody,
treacherous,
More mild, but yet more harmful, kind in hatred:
What comfortable hour canst thou name,
That ever graced me in thy company?
Faith, none, but Humphrey Hour, that calld
your grace
To breakfast once forth of my company.
If I be so disgracious in your sight,
Let me march on, and not offend your grace.
Strike the drum.
I prithee, hear me speak.
You speak too bitterly.
Hear me a word;
For I shall never speak to thee again.
So.
Either thou wilt die, by Gods just ordinance,
Ere from this war thou turn a conqueror,
Or I with grief and extreme age shall perish
And never look upon thy face again.
Therefore take with thee my most heavy curse;
Which, in the day of battle, tire thee more
Than all the complete armour that thou wearst!
My prayers on the adverse party fight;
And there the little souls of Edwards children
Whisper the spirits of thine enemies
And promise them success and victory.
Bloody thou art, bloody will be thy end;
Shame serves thy life and doth thy death attend.
Exit
Though far more cause, yet much less spirit to curse
Abides in me; I say amen to all.
Stay, madam; I must speak a word with you.
I have no more sons of the royal blood
For thee to murder: for my daughters, Richard,
They shall be praying nuns, not weeping queens;
And therefore level not to hit their lives.
You have a daughter calld Elizabeth,
Virtuous and fair, royal and gracious.
And must she die for this? O, let her live,
And Ill corrupt her manners, stain her beauty;
Slander myself as false to Edwards bed;
Throw over her the veil of infamy:
So she may live unscarrd of bleeding slaughter,
I will confess she was not Edwards daughter.
Wrong not her birth, she is of royal blood.
To save her life, Ill say she is not so.
Her life is only safest in her birth.
And only in that safety died her brothers.
Lo, at their births good stars were opposite.
No, to their lives bad friends were contrary.
All unavoided is the doom of destiny.
True, when avoided grace makes destiny:
My babes were destined to a fairer death,
If grace had blessd thee with a fairer life.
You speak as if that I had slain my cousins.
Cousins, indeed; and by their uncle cozend
Of comfort, kingdom, kindred, freedom, life.
Whose hand soever lanced their tender hearts,
Thy head, all indirectly, gave direction:
No doubt the murderous knife was dull and blunt
Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart,
To revel in the entrails of my lambs.
But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame,
My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys
Till that my nails were anchord in thine eyes;
And I, in such a desperate bay of death,
Like a poor bark, of sails and tackling reft,
Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom.
Madam, so thrive I in my enterprise
And dangerous success of bloody wars,
As I intend more good to you and yours,
Than ever you or yours were by me wrongd!
What good is coverd with the face of heaven,
To be discoverd, that can do me good?
The advancement of your children, gentle lady.
Up to some scaffold, there to lose their heads?
No, to the dignity and height of honour
The high imperial type of this earths glory.
Flatter my sorrows with report of it;
Tell me what state, what dignity, what honour,
Canst thou demise to any child of mine?
Even all I have; yea, and myself and all,
Will I withal endow a child of thine;
So in the Lethe of thy angry soul
Thou drown the sad remembrance of those wrongs
Which thou supposest I have done to thee.
Be brief, lest that be process of thy kindness
Last longer telling than thy kindness date.
Then know, that from my soul I love thy daughter.
My daughters mother thinks it with her soul.
What do you think?
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul:
So from thy souls love didst thou love her brothers;
And from my hearts love I do thank thee for it.
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning:
I mean, that with my soul I love thy daughter,
And mean to make her queen of England.
Say then, who dost thou mean shall be her king?
Even he that makes her queen who should be else?
What, thou?
I, even I: what think you of it, madam?
How canst thou woo her?
That would I learn of you,
As one that are best acquainted with her humour.
And wilt thou learn of me?
Madam, with all my heart.
Send to her, by the man that slew her brothers,
A pair of bleeding-hearts; thereon engrave
Edward and York; then haply she will weep:
Therefore present to her--as sometime Margaret
Did to thy father, steepd in Rutlands blood,--
A handkerchief; which, say to her, did drain
The purple sap from her sweet brothers body
And bid her dry her weeping eyes therewith.
If this inducement force her not to love,
Send her a story of thy noble acts;
Tell her thou madest away her uncle Clarence,
Her uncle Rivers; yea, and, for her sake,
Madest quick conveyance with her good aunt Anne.
Come, come, you mock me; this is not the way
To win our daughter.
There is no other way
Unless thou couldst put on some other shape,
And not be Richard that hath done all this.
Say that I did all this for love of her.
Nay, then indeed she cannot choose but hate thee,
Having bought love with such a bloody spoil.
Look, what is done cannot be now amended:
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes,
Which after hours give leisure to repent.
If I did take the kingdom from your sons,
To make amends, Ill give it to your daughter.
If I have killd the issue of your womb,
To quicken your increase, I will beget
Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter
A grandams name is little less in love
Than is the doting title of a mother;
They are as children but one step below,
Even of your mettle, of your very blood;
Of an one pain, save for a night of groans
Endured of her, for whom you bid like sorrow.
Your children were vexation to your youth,
But mine shall be a comfort to your age.
The loss you have is but a son being king,
And by that loss your daughter is made queen.
I cannot make you what amends I would,
Therefore accept such kindness as I can.
Dorset your son, that with a fearful soul
Leads discontented steps in foreign soil,
This fair alliance quickly shall call home
To high promotions and great dignity:
The king, that calls your beauteous daughter wife.
Familiarly shall call thy Dorset brother;
Again shall you be mother to a king,
And all the ruins of distressful times
Repaird with double riches of content.
What! we have many goodly days to see:
The liquid drops of tears that you have shed
Shall come again, transformd to orient pearl,
Advantaging their loan with interest
Of ten times double gain of happiness.
Go, then my mother, to thy daughter go
Make bold her bashful years with your experience;
Prepare her ears to hear a wooers tale
Put in her tender heart the aspiring flame
Of golden sovereignty; acquaint the princess
With the sweet silent hours of marriage joys
And when this arm of mine hath chastised
The petty rebel, dull-braind Buckingham,
Bound with triumphant garlands will I come
And lead thy daughter to a conquerors bed;
To whom I will retail my conquest won,
And she shall be sole victress, Caesars Caesar.
What were I best to say? her fathers brother
Would be her lord? or shall I say, her uncle?
Or, he that slew her brothers and her uncles?
Under what title shall I woo for thee,
That God, the law, my honour and her love,
Can make seem pleasing to her tender years?
Infer fair Englands peace by this alliance.
Which she shall purchase with still lasting war.
Say that the king, which may command, entreats.
That at her hands which the kings King forbids.
Say, she shall be a high and mighty queen.
To wail the tide, as her mother doth.
Say, I will love her everlastingly.
But how long shall that title ever last?
Sweetly in force unto her fair lifes end.
But how long fairly shall her sweet lie last?
So long as heaven and nature lengthens it.
So long as hell and Richard likes of it.
Say, I, her sovereign, am her subject love.
But she, your subject, loathes such sovereignty.
Be eloquent in my behalf to her.
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told.
Then in plain terms tell her my loving tale.
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style.
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick.
O no, my reasons are too deep and dead;
Too deep and dead, poor infants, in their grave.
Harp not on that string, madam; that is past.
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break.
Now, by my George, my garter, and my crown,--
Profaned, dishonourd, and the third usurpd.
I swear--
By nothing; for this is no oath:
The George, profaned, hath lost his holy honour;
The garter, blemishd, pawnd his knightly virtue;
The crown, usurpd, disgraced his kingly glory.
if something thou wilt swear to be believed,
Swear then by something that thou hast not wrongd.
Now, by the world--
Tis full of thy foul wrongs.
My fathers death--
Thy life hath that dishonourd.
Then, by myself--
Thyself thyself misusest.
Why then, by God--
Gods wrong is most of all.
If thou hadst feard to break an oath by Him,
The unity the king thy brother made
Had not been broken, nor my brother slain:
If thou hadst feard to break an oath by Him,
The imperial metal, circling now thy brow,
Had graced the tender temples of my child,
And both the princes had been breathing here,
Which now, two tender playfellows to dust,
Thy broken faith hath made a prey for worms.
What canst thou swear by now?
The time to come.
That thou hast wronged in the time oerpast;
For I myself have many tears to wash
Hereafter time, for time past wrongd by thee.
The children live, whose parents thou hast
slaughterd,
Ungovernd youth, to wail it in their age;
The parents live, whose children thou hast butcherd,
Old witherd plants, to wail it with their age.
Swear not by time to come; for that thou hast
Misused ere used, by time misused oerpast.
As I intend to prosper and repent,
So thrive I in my dangerous attempt
Of hostile arms! myself myself confound!
Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours!
Day, yield me not thy light; nor, night, thy rest!
Be opposite all planets of good luck
To my proceedings, if, with pure hearts love,
Immaculate devotion, holy thoughts,
I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter!
In her consists my happiness and thine;
Without her, follows to this land and me,
To thee, herself, and many a Christian soul,
Death, desolation, ruin and decay:
It cannot be avoided but by this;
It will not be avoided but by this.
Therefore, good mother,--I must can you so--
Be the attorney of my love to her:
Plead what I will be, not what I have been;
Not my deserts, but what I will deserve:
Urge the necessity and state of times,
And be not peevish-fond in great designs.
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus?
Ay, if the devil tempt thee to do good.
Shall I forget myself to be myself?
Ay, if yourselfs remembrance wrong yourself.
But thou didst kill my children.
But in your daughters womb I bury them:
Where in that nest of spicery they shall breed
Selves of themselves, to your recomforture.
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will?
And be a happy mother by the deed.
I go. Write to me very shortly.
And you shall understand from me her mind.
Bear her my true loves kiss; and so, farewell.
Exit QUEEN ELIZABETH
Relenting fool, and shallow, changing woman!
Enter RATCLIFF; CATESBY following
How now! what news?
My gracious sovereign, on the western coast
Rideth a puissant navy; to the shore
Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends,
Unarmd, and unresolved to beat them back:
Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral;
And there they hull, expecting but the aid
Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore.
Some light-foot friend post to the Duke of Norfolk:
Ratcliff, thyself, or Catesby; where is he?
Here, my lord.
Fly to the duke:
To RATCLIFF
Post thou to Salisbury
When thou comest thither--
To CATESBY
Dull, unmindful villain,
Why standst thou still, and gost not to the duke?
First, mighty sovereign, let me know your mind,
What from your grace I shall deliver to him.
O, true, good Catesby: bid him levy straight
The greatest strength and power he can make,
And meet me presently at Salisbury.
I go.
Exit
What ist your highness pleasure I shall do at
Salisbury?
Why, what wouldst thou do there before I go?
Your highness told me I should post before.
My mind is changed, sir, my mind is changed.
Enter STANLEY
How now, what news with you?
None good, my lord, to please you with the hearing;
Nor none so bad, but it may well be told.
Hoyday, a riddle! neither good nor bad!
Why dost thou run so many mile about,
When thou mayst tell thy tale a nearer way?
Once more, what news?
Richmond is on the seas.
There let him sink, and be the seas on him!
White-liverd runagate, what doth he there?
I know not, mighty sovereign, but by guess.
Well, sir, as you guess, as you guess?
Stirrd up by Dorset, Buckingham, and Ely,
He makes for England, there to claim the crown.
Is the chair empty? is the sword unswayd?
Is the king dead? the empire unpossessd?
What heir of York is there alive but we?
And who is Englands king but great Yorks heir?
Then, tell me, what doth he upon the sea?
Unless for that, my liege, I cannot guess.
Unless for that he comes to be your liege,
You cannot guess wherefore the Welshman comes.
Thou wilt revolt, and fly to him, I fear.
No, mighty liege; therefore mistrust me not.
Where is thy power, then, to beat him back?
Where are thy tenants and thy followers?
Are they not now upon the western shore.
Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships!
No, my good lord, my friends are in the north.
Cold friends to Richard: what do they in the north,
When they should serve their sovereign in the west?
They have not been commanded, mighty sovereign:
Please it your majesty to give me leave,
Ill muster up my friends, and meet your grace
Where and what time your majesty shall please.
Ay, ay. thou wouldst be gone to join with Richmond:
I will not trust you, sir.
Most mighty sovereign,
You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful:
I never was nor never will be false.
Well,
Go muster men; but, hear you, leave behind
Your son, George Stanley: look your faith be firm.
Or else his heads assurance is but frail.
So deal with him as I prove true to you.
Exit
Enter a Messenger
My gracious sovereign, now in Devonshire,
As I by friends am well advertised,
Sir Edward Courtney, and the haughty prelate
Bishop of Exeter, his brother there,
With many more confederates, are in arms.
Enter another Messenger
My liege, in Kent the Guildfords are in arms;
And every hour more competitors
Flock to their aid, and still their power increaseth.
Enter another Messenger
My lord, the army of the Duke of Buckingham--
Out on you, owls! nothing but songs of death?
He striketh him
Take that, until thou bring me better news.
The news I have to tell your majesty
Is, that by sudden floods and fall of waters,
Buckinghams army is dispersed and scatterd;
And he himself wanderd away alone,
No man knows whither.
I cry thee mercy:
There is my purse to cure that blow of thine.
Hath any well-advised friend proclaimd
Reward to him that brings the traitor in?
Such proclamation hath been made, my liege.
Enter another Messenger
Sir Thomas Lovel and Lord Marquis Dorset,
Tis said, my liege, in Yorkshire are in arms.
Yet this good comfort bring I to your grace,
The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest:
Richmond, in Yorkshire, sent out a boat
Unto the shore, to ask those on the banks
If they were his assistants, yea or no;
Who answerd him, they came from Buckingham.
Upon his party: he, mistrusting them,
Hoisted sail and made away for Brittany.
March on, march on, since we are up in arms;
If not to fight with foreign enemies,
Yet to beat down these rebels here at home.
Re-enter CATESBY
My liege, the Duke of Buckingham is taken;
That is the best news: that the Earl of Richmond
Is with a mighty power landed at Milford,
Is colder tidings, yet they must be told.
Away towards Salisbury! while we reason here,
A royal battle might be won and lost
Some one take order Buckingham be brought
To Salisbury; the rest march on with me.
Flourish. Exeunt
SCENE V. Lord Derbys house.
Enter DERBY and SIR CHRISTOPHER URSWICK
Sir Christopher, tell Richmond this from me:
That in the sty of this most bloody boar
My son George Stanley is frankd up in hold:
If I revolt, off goes young Georges head;
The fear of that withholds my present aid.
But, tell me, where is princely Richmond now?
At Pembroke, or at Harford-west, in Wales.
What men of name resort to him?
Sir Walter Herbert, a renowned soldier;
Sir Gilbert Talbot, Sir William Stanley;
Oxford, redoubted Pembroke, Sir James Blunt,
And Rice ap Thomas with a valiant crew;
And many more of noble fame and worth:
And towards London they do bend their course,
If by the way they be not fought withal.
Return unto thy lord; commend me to him:
Tell him the queen hath heartily consented
He shall espouse Elizabeth her daughter.
These letters will resolve him of my mind. Farewell.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Salisbury. An open place.
Enter the Sheriff, and BUCKINGHAM, with halberds, led to execution
Will not King Richard let me speak with him?
No, my good lord; therefore be patient.
Hastings, and Edwards children, Rivers, Grey,
Holy King Henry, and thy fair son Edward,
Vaughan, and all that have miscarried
By underhand corrupted foul injustice,
If that your moody discontented souls
Do through the clouds behold this present hour,
Even for revenge mock my destruction!
This is All-Souls day, fellows, is it not?
It is, my lord.
Why, then All-Souls day is my bodys doomsday.
This is the day that, in King Edwards time,
I wisht might fall on me, when I was found
False to his children or his wifes allies
This is the day wherein I wishd to fall
By the false faith of him I trusted most;
This, this All-Souls day to my fearful soul
Is the determined respite of my wrongs:
That high All-Seer that I dallied with
Hath turnd my feigned prayer on my head
And given in earnest what I beggd in jest.
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men
To turn their own points on their masters bosoms:
Now Margarets curse is fallen upon my head;
When he, quoth she, shall split thy heart with sorrow,
Remember Margaret was a prophetess.
Come, sirs, convey me to the block of shame;
Wrong hath but wrong, and blame the due of blame.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The camp near Tamworth.
Enter RICHMOND, OXFORD, BLUNT, HERBERT, and others, with drum and colours
Fellows in arms, and my most loving friends,
Bruised underneath the yoke of tyranny,
Thus far into the bowels of the land
Have we marchd on without impediment;
And here receive we from our father Stanley
Lines of fair comfort and encouragement.
The wretched, bloody, and usurping boar,
That spoild your summer fields and fruitful vines,
Swills your warm blood like wash, and makes his trough
In your embowelld bosoms, this foul swine
Lies now even in the centre of this isle,
Near to the town of Leicester, as we learn
From Tamworth thither is but one days march.
In Gods name, cheerly on, courageous friends,
To reap the harvest of perpetual peace
By this one bloody trial of sharp war.
Every mans conscience is a thousand swords,
To fight against that bloody homicide.
I doubt not but his friends will fly to us.
He hath no friends but who are friends for fear.
Which in his greatest need will shrink from him.
All for our vantage. Then, in Gods name, march:
True hope is swift, and flies with swallows wings:
Kings it makes gods, and meaner creatures kings.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Bosworth Field.
Enter KING RICHARD III in arms, with NORFOLK, SURREY, and others
Here pitch our tents, even here in Bosworth field.
My Lord of Surrey, why look you so sad?
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks.
My Lord of Norfolk,--
Here, most gracious liege.
Norfolk, we must have knocks; ha! must we not?
We must both give and take, my gracious lord.
Up with my tent there! here will I lie tonight;
But where to-morrow?  Well, alls one for that.
Who hath descried the number of the foe?
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power.
Why, our battalion trebles that account:
Besides, the kings name is a tower of strength,
Which they upon the adverse party want.
Up with my tent there! Valiant gentlemen,
Let us survey the vantage of the field
Call for some men of sound direction
Lets want no discipline, make no delay,
For, lords, to-morrow is a busy day.
Exeunt
Enter, on the other side of the field, RICHMOND,  Sir William Brandon, OXFORD, and others. Some of the Soldiers pitch RICHMONDs tent
The weary sun hath made a golden set,
And by the bright track of his fiery car,
Gives signal, of a goodly day to-morrow.
Sir William Brandon, you shall bear my standard.
Give me some ink and paper in my tent
Ill draw the form and model of our battle,
Limit each leader to his several charge,
And part in just proportion our small strength.
My Lord of Oxford, you, Sir William Brandon,
And you, Sir Walter Herbert, stay with me.
The Earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment:
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good night to him
And by the second hour in the morning
Desire the earl to see me in my tent:
Yet one thing more, good Blunt, before thou gost,
Where is Lord Stanley quarterd, dost thou know?
Unless I have mistaen his colours much,
Which well I am assured I have not done,
His regiment lies half a mile at least
South from the mighty power of the king.
If without peril it be possible,
Good Captain Blunt, bear my good-night to him,
And give him from me this most needful scroll.
Upon my life, my lord, Ill under-take it;
And so, God give you quiet rest to-night!
Good night, good Captain Blunt. Come gentlemen,
Let us consult upon to-morrows business
In to our tent; the air is raw and cold.
They withdraw into the tent
Enter, to his tent, KING RICHARD III, NORFOLK, RATCLIFF, CATESBY, and others
What ist oclock?
Its supper-time, my lord;
Its nine oclock.
I will not sup to-night.
Give me some ink and paper.
What, is my beaver easier than it was?
And all my armour laid into my tent?
If is, my liege; and all things are in readiness.
Good Norfolk, hie thee to thy charge;
Use careful watch, choose trusty sentinels.
I go, my lord.
Stir with the lark to-morrow, gentle Norfolk.
I warrant you, my lord.
Exit
Catesby!
My lord?
Send out a pursuivant at arms
To Stanleys regiment; bid him bring his power
Before sunrising, lest his son George fall
Into the blind cave of eternal night.
Exit CATESBY
Fill me a bowl of wine. Give me a watch.
Saddle white Surrey for the field to-morrow.
Look that my staves be sound, and not too heavy.
Ratcliff!
My lord?
Sawst thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland?
Thomas the Earl of Surrey, and himself,
Much about cock-shut time, from troop to troop
Went through the army, cheering up the soldiers.
So, I am satisfied. Give me a bowl of wine:
I have not that alacrity of spirit,
Nor cheer of mind, that I was wont to have.
Set it down. Is ink and paper ready?
It is, my lord.
Bid my guard watch; leave me.
Ratcliff, about the mid of night come to my tent
And help to arm me. Leave me, I say.
Exeunt RATCLIFF and the other Attendants
Enter DERBY to RICHMOND in his tent, Lords and others attending
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm!
All comfort that the dark night can afford
Be to thy person, noble father-in-law!
Tell me, how fares our loving mother?
I, by attorney, bless thee from thy mother
Who prays continually for Richmonds good:
So much for that. The silent hours steal on,
And flaky darkness breaks within the east.
In brief,--for so the season bids us be,--
Prepare thy battle early in the morning,
And put thy fortune to the arbitrement
Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war.
I, as I may--that which I would I cannot,--
With best advantage will deceive the time,
And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms:
But on thy side I may not be too forward
Lest, being seen, thy brother, tender George,
Be executed in his fathers sight.
Farewell: the leisure and the fearful time
Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love
And ample interchange of sweet discourse,
Which so long sunderd friends should dwell upon:
God give us leisure for these rites of love!
Once more, adieu: be valiant, and speed well!
Good lords, conduct him to his regiment:
Ill strive, with troubled thoughts, to take a nap,
Lest leaden slumber peise me down to-morrow,
When I should mount with wings of victory:
Once more, good night, kind lords and gentlemen.
Exeunt all but RICHMOND
O Thou, whose captain I account myself,
Look on my forces with a gracious eye;
Put in their hands thy bruising irons of wrath,
That they may crush down with a heavy fall
The usurping helmets of our adversaries!
Make us thy ministers of chastisement,
That we may praise thee in the victory!
To thee I do commend my watchful soul,
Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes:
Sleeping and waking, O, defend me still!
Sleeps
Enter the Ghost of Prince Edward, son to King Henry VI
Ghost
[To KING RICHARD III]
Let me sit heavy on thy soul to-morrow!
Think, how thou stabdst me in my prime of youth
At Tewksbury: despair, therefore, and die!
To RICHMOND
Be cheerful, Richmond; for the wronged souls
Of butcherd princes fight in thy behalf
King Henrys issue, Richmond, comforts thee.
Enter the Ghost of King Henry VI
Ghost
[To KING RICHARD III]
When I was mortal, my anointed body
By thee was punched full of deadly holes
Think on the Tower and me: despair, and die!
Harry the Sixth bids thee despair, and die!
To RICHMOND
Virtuous and holy, be thou conqueror!
Harry, that prophesied thou shouldst be king,
Doth comfort thee in thy sleep: live, and flourish!
Enter the Ghost of CLARENCE
[To KING RICHARD III]
Let me sit heavy on thy soul to-morrow!
I, that was washd to death with fulsome wine,
Poor Clarence, by thy guile betrayed to death!
To-morrow in the battle think on me,
And fall thy edgeless sword: despair, and die!--
To RICHMOND
Thou offspring of the house of Lancaster
The wronged heirs of York do pray for thee
Good angels guard thy battle! live, and flourish!
Enter the Ghosts of RIVERS, GRAY, and VAUGHAN
[To KING RICHARD III]
Let me sit heavy on thy soul to-morrow,
Rivers. that died at Pomfret! despair, and die!
[To KING RICHARD III]
Think upon Grey, and let thy soul despair!
[To KING RICHARD III]
Think upon Vaughan, and, with guilty fear,
Let fall thy lance: despair, and die!
[To RICHMOND]
Awake, and think our wrongs in Richards bosom
Will conquer him! awake, and win the day!
Enter the Ghost of HASTINGS
[To KING RICHARD III]
Bloody and guilty, guiltily awake,
And in a bloody battle end thy days!
Think on Lord Hastings: despair, and die!
To RICHMOND
Quiet untroubled soul, awake, awake!
Arm, fight, and conquer, for fair Englands sake!
Enter the Ghosts of the two young Princes
Ghosts
[To KING RICHARD III]
Dream on thy cousins smotherd in the Tower:
Let us be led within thy bosom, Richard,
And weigh thee down to ruin, shame, and death!
Thy nephews souls bid thee despair and die!
To RICHMOND
Sleep, Richmond, sleep in peace, and wake in joy;
Good angels guard thee from the boars annoy!
Live, and beget a happy race of kings!
