What say you? will you yield, and this avoid,
Or, guilty in defence, be thus destroyd?
Our expectation hath this day an end:
The Dauphin, whom of succors we entreated,
Returns us that his powers are yet not ready
To raise so great a siege. Therefore, great king,
We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy.
Enter our gates; dispose of us and ours;
For we no longer are defensible.
Open your gates. Come, uncle Exeter,
Go you and enter Harfleur; there remain,
And fortify it strongly gainst the French:
Use mercy to them all. For us, dear uncle,
The winter coming on and sickness growing
Upon our soldiers, we will retire to Calais.
To-night in Harfleur we will be your guest;
To-morrow for the march are we addrest.
Flourish. The King and his train enter the town
SCENE IV. The FRENCH KINGs palace.
Enter KATHARINE and ALICE
Alice, tu as ete en Angleterre, et tu parles bien le langage.
Un peu, madame.
Je te prie, menseignez: il faut que japprenne a
parler. Comment appelez-vous la main en Anglois?
La main? elle est appelee de hand.
De hand. Et les doigts?
Les doigts? ma foi, joublie les doigts; mais je me
souviendrai. Les doigts? je pense quils sont
appeles de fingres; oui, de fingres.
La main, de hand; les doigts, de fingres. Je pense
que je suis le bon ecolier; jai gagne deux mots
dAnglois vitement. Comment appelez-vous les ongles?
Les ongles? nous les appelons de nails.
De nails. Ecoutez; dites-moi, si je parle bien: de
hand, de fingres, et de nails.
Cest bien dit, madame; il est fort bon Anglois.
Dites-moi lAnglois pour le bras.
De arm, madame.
Et le coude?
De elbow.
De elbow. Je men fais la repetition de tous les
mots que vous mavez appris des a present.
Il est trop difficile, madame, comme je pense.
Excusez-moi, Alice; ecoutez: de hand, de fingres,
de nails, de arma, de bilbow.
De elbow, madame.
O Seigneur Dieu, je men oublie! de elbow. Comment
appelez-vous le col?
De neck, madame.
De nick. Et le menton?
De chin.
De sin. Le col, de nick; de menton, de sin.
Oui. Sauf votre honneur, en verite, vous prononcez
les mots aussi droit que les natifs dAngleterre.
Je ne doute point dapprendre, par la grace de Dieu,
et en peu de temps.
Navez vous pas deja oublie ce que je vous ai enseigne?
Non, je reciterai a vous promptement: de hand, de
fingres, de mails--
De nails, madame.
De nails, de arm, de ilbow.
Sauf votre honneur, de elbow.
Ainsi dis-je; de elbow, de nick, et de sin. Comment
appelez-vous le pied et la robe?
De foot, madame; et de coun.
De foot et de coun! O Seigneur Dieu! ce sont mots
de son mauvais, corruptible, gros, et impudique, et
non pour les dames dhonneur duser: je ne voudrais
prononcer ces mots devant les seigneurs de France
pour tout le monde. Foh! le foot et le coun!
Neanmoins, je reciterai une autre fois ma lecon
ensemble: de hand, de fingres, de nails, de arm, de
elbow, de nick, de sin, de foot, de coun.
Excellent, madame!
Cest assez pour une fois: allons-nous a diner.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The same.
Enter the KING OF FRANCE, the DAUPHIN, the DUKE oF BOURBON, the Constable Of France, and others
Tis certain he hath passd the river Somme.
And if he be not fought withal, my lord,
Let us not live in France; let us quit all
And give our vineyards to a barbarous people.
O Dieu vivant! shall a few sprays of us,
The emptying of our fathers luxury,
Our scions, put in wild and savage stock,
Spirt up so suddenly into the clouds,
And overlook their grafters?
Normans, but bastard Normans, Norman bastards!
Mort de ma vie! if they march along
Unfought withal, but I will sell my dukedom,
To buy a slobbery and a dirty farm
In that nook-shotten isle of Albion.
Dieu de batailles! where have they this mettle?
Is not their climate foggy, raw and dull,
On whom, as in despite, the sun looks pale,
Killing their fruit with frowns? Can sodden water,
A drench for sur-reind jades, their barley-broth,
Decoct their cold blood to such valiant heat?
And shall our quick blood, spirited with wine,
Seem frosty? O, for honour of our land,
Let us not hang like roping icicles
Upon our houses thatch, whiles a more frosty people
Sweat drops of gallant youth in our rich fields!
Poor we may call them in their native lords.
By faith and honour,
Our madams mock at us, and plainly say
Our mettle is bred out and they will give
Their bodies to the lust of English youth
To new-store France with bastard warriors.
They bid us to the English dancing-schools,
And teach lavoltas high and swift corantos;
Saying our grace is only in our heels,
And that we are most lofty runaways.
Where is Montjoy the herald? speed him hence:
Let him greet England with our sharp defiance.
Up, princes! and, with spirit of honour edged
More sharper than your swords, hie to the field:
Charles Delabreth, high constable of France;
You Dukes of Orleans, Bourbon, and of Berri,
Alencon, Brabant, Bar, and Burgundy;
Jaques Chatillon, Rambures, Vaudemont,
Beaumont, Grandpre, Roussi, and Fauconberg,
Foix, Lestrale, Bouciqualt, and Charolois;
High dukes, great princes, barons, lords and knights,
For your great seats now quit you of great shames.
Bar Harry England, that sweeps through our land
With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur:
Rush on his host, as doth the melted snow
Upon the valleys, whose low vassal seat
The Alps doth spit and void his rheum upon:
Go down upon him, you have power enough,
And in a captive chariot into Rouen
Bring him our prisoner.
This becomes the great.
Sorry am I his numbers are so few,
His soldiers sick and famishd in their march,
For I am sure, when he shall see our army,
Hell drop his heart into the sink of fear
And for achievement offer us his ransom.
Therefore, lord constable, haste on Montjoy.
And let him say to England that we send
To know what willing ransom he will give.
Prince Dauphin, you shall stay with us in Rouen.
Not so, I do beseech your majesty.
Be patient, for you shall remain with us.
Now forth, lord constable and princes all,
And quickly bring us word of Englands fall.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. The English camp in Picardy.
Enter GOWER and FLUELLEN, meeting
How now, Captain Fluellen! come you from the bridge?
I assure you, there is very excellent services
committed at the bridge.
Is the Duke of Exeter safe?
The Duke of Exeter is as magnanimous as Agamemnon;
and a man that I love and honour with my soul, and my
heart, and my duty, and my life, and my living, and
my uttermost power: he is not-God be praised and
blessed!--any hurt in the world; but keeps the
bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline.
There is an aunchient lieutenant there at the
pridge, I think in my very conscience he is as
valiant a man as Mark Antony; and he is a man of no
estimation in the world; but did see him do as
gallant service.
What do you call him?
He is called Aunchient Pistol.
I know him not.
Enter PISTOL
Here is the man.
Captain, I thee beseech to do me favours:
The Duke of Exeter doth love thee well.
Ay, I praise God; and I have merited some love at
his hands.
Bardolph, a soldier, firm and sound of heart,
And of buxom valour, hath, by cruel fate,
And giddy Fortunes furious fickle wheel,
That goddess blind,
That stands upon the rolling restless stone--
By your patience, Aunchient Pistol. Fortune is
painted blind, with a muffler afore her eyes, to
signify to you that Fortune is blind; and she is
painted also with a wheel, to signify to you, which
is the moral of it, that she is turning, and
inconstant, and mutability, and variation: and her
foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone,
which rolls, and rolls, and rolls: in good truth,
the poet makes a most excellent description of it:
Fortune is an excellent moral.
Fortune is Bardolphs foe, and frowns on him;
For he hath stolen a pax, and hanged must a be:
A damned death!
Let gallows gape for dog; let man go free
And let not hemp his wind-pipe suffocate:
But Exeter hath given the doom of death
For pax of little price.
Therefore, go speak: the duke will hear thy voice:
And let not Bardolphs vital thread be cut
With edge of penny cord and vile reproach:
Speak, captain, for his life, and I will thee requite.
Aunchient Pistol, I do partly understand your meaning.
Why then, rejoice therefore.
Certainly, aunchient, it is not a thing to rejoice
at: for if, look you, he were my brother, I would
desire the duke to use his good pleasure, and put
him to execution; for discipline ought to be used.
Die and be damnd! and figo for thy friendship!
It is well.
The fig of Spain!
Exit
Very good.
Why, this is an arrant counterfeit rascal; I
remember him now; a bawd, a cutpurse.
Ill assure you, a uttered as brave words at the
bridge as you shall see in a summers day. But it
is very well; what he has spoke to me, that is well,
I warrant you, when time is serve.
Why, tis a gull, a fool, a rogue, that now and then
goes to the wars, to grace himself at his return
into London under the form of a soldier. And such
fellows are perfect in the great commanders names:
and they will learn you by rote where services were
done; at such and such a sconce, at such a breach,
at such a convoy; who came off bravely, who was
shot, who disgraced, what terms the enemy stood on;
and this they con perfectly in the phrase of war,
which they trick up with new-tuned oaths: and what
a beard of the generals cut and a horrid suit of
the camp will do among foaming bottles and
ale-washed wits, is wonderful to be thought on. But
you must learn to know such slanders of the age, or
else you may be marvellously mistook.
I tell you what, Captain Gower; I do perceive he is
not the man that he would gladly make show to the
world he is: if I find a hole in his coat, I will
tell him my mind.
Drum heard
Hark you, the king is coming, and I must speak with
him from the pridge.
Drum and colours. Enter KING HENRY, GLOUCESTER, and Soldiers
God pless your majesty!
How now, Fluellen! camest thou from the bridge?
Ay, so please your majesty. The Duke of Exeter has
very gallantly maintained the pridge: the French is
gone off, look you; and there is gallant and most
prave passages; marry, th athversary was have
possession of the pridge; but he is enforced to
retire, and the Duke of Exeter is master of the
pridge: I can tell your majesty, the duke is a
prave man.
What men have you lost, Fluellen?
The perdition of th athversary hath been very
great, reasonable great: marry, for my part, I
think the duke hath lost never a man, but one that
is like to be executed for robbing a church, one
Bardolph, if your majesty know the man: his face is
all bubukles, and whelks, and knobs, and flames o
fire: and his lips blows at his nose, and it is like
a coal of fire, sometimes plue and sometimes red;
but his nose is executed and his fires out.
We would have all such offenders so cut off: and we
give express charge, that in our marches through the
country, there be nothing compelled from the
villages, nothing taken but paid for, none of the
French upbraided or abused in disdainful language;
for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom, the
gentler gamester is the soonest winner.
Tucket. Enter MONTJOY
You know me by my habit.
Well then I know thee: what shall I know of thee?
My masters mind.
Unfold it.
Thus says my king: Say thou to Harry of England:
Though we seemed dead, we did but sleep: advantage
is a better soldier than rashness. Tell him we
could have rebuked him at Harfleur, but that we
thought not good to bruise an injury till it were
full ripe: now we speak upon our cue, and our voice
is imperial: England shall repent his folly, see
his weakness, and admire our sufferance. Bid him
therefore consider of his ransom; which must
proportion the losses we have borne, the subjects we
have lost, the disgrace we have digested; which in
weight to re-answer, his pettiness would bow under.
For our losses, his exchequer is too poor; for the
effusion of our blood, the muster of his kingdom too
faint a number; and for our disgrace, his own
person, kneeling at our feet, but a weak and
worthless satisfaction. To this add defiance: and
tell him, for conclusion, he hath betrayed his
followers, whose condemnation is pronounced. So far
my king and master; so much my office.
What is thy name? I know thy quality.
Montjoy.
Thou dost thy office fairly. Turn thee back.
And tell thy king I do not seek him now;
But could be willing to march on to Calais
Without impeachment: for, to say the sooth,
Though tis no wisdom to confess so much
Unto an enemy of craft and vantage,
My people are with sickness much enfeebled,
My numbers lessened, and those few I have
Almost no better than so many French;
Who when they were in health, I tell thee, herald,
I thought upon one pair of English legs
Did march three Frenchmen. Yet, forgive me, God,
That I do brag thus! This your air of France
Hath blown that vice in me: I must repent.
Go therefore, tell thy master here I am;
My ransom is this frail and worthless trunk,
My army but a weak and sickly guard;
Yet, God before, tell him we will come on,
Though France himself and such another neighbour
Stand in our way. Theres for thy labour, Montjoy.
Go bid thy master well advise himself:
If we may pass, we will; if we be hinderd,
We shall your tawny ground with your red blood
Discolour: and so Montjoy, fare you well.
The sum of all our answer is but this:
We would not seek a battle, as we are;
Nor, as we are, we say we will not shun it:
So tell your master.
I shall deliver so. Thanks to your highness.
Exit
I hope they will not come upon us now.
We are in Gods hand, brother, not in theirs.
March to the bridge; it now draws toward night:
Beyond the river well encamp ourselves,
And on to-morrow, bid them march away.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. The French camp, near Agincourt:
Enter the Constable of France, the LORD RAMBURES, ORLEANS, DAUPHIN, with others
Tut! I have the best armour of the world. Would it were day!
You have an excellent armour; but let my horse have his due.
It is the best horse of Europe.
Will it never be morning?
My lord of Orleans, and my lord high constable, you
talk of horse and armour?
You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.
What a long night is this! I will not change my
horse with any that treads but on four pasterns.
Ca, ha! he bounds from the earth, as if his
entrails were hairs; le cheval volant, the Pegasus,
chez les narines de feu! When I bestride him, I
soar, I am a hawk: he trots the air; the earth
sings when he touches it; the basest horn of his
hoof is more musical than the pipe of Hermes.
Hes of the colour of the nutmeg.
And of the heat of the ginger. It is a beast for
Perseus: he is pure air and fire; and the dull
elements of earth and water never appear in him, but
only in Patient stillness while his rider mounts
him: he is indeed a horse; and all other jades you
may call beasts.
Indeed, my lord, it is a most absolute and excellent horse.
It is the prince of palfreys; his neigh is like the
bidding of a monarch and his countenance enforces homage.
No more, cousin.
Nay, the man hath no wit that cannot, from the
rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary
deserved praise on my palfrey: it is a theme as
fluent as the sea: turn the sands into eloquent
tongues, and my horse is argument for them all:
tis a subject for a sovereign to reason on, and for
a sovereigns sovereign to ride on; and for the
world, familiar to us and unknown to lay apart
their particular functions and wonder at him. I
once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus:
Wonder of nature,--
I have heard a sonnet begin so to ones mistress.
Then did they imitate that which I composed to my
courser, for my horse is my mistress.
Your mistress bears well.
Me well; which is the prescript praise and
perfection of a good and particular mistress.
Nay, for methought yesterday your mistress shrewdly
shook your back.
So perhaps did yours.
Mine was not bridled.
O then belike she was old and gentle; and you rode,
like a kern of Ireland, your French hose off, and in
your straight strossers.
You have good judgment in horsemanship.
Be warned by me, then: they that ride so and ride
not warily, fall into foul bogs. I had rather have
my horse to my mistress.
I had as lief have my mistress a jade.
I tell thee, constable, my mistress wears his own hair.
I could make as true a boast as that, if I had a sow
to my mistress.
Le chien est retourne a son propre vomissement, et
la truie lavee au bourbier; thou makest use of any thing.
Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress, or any
such proverb so little kin to the purpose.
My lord constable, the armour that I saw in your tent
to-night, are those stars or suns upon it?
Stars, my lord.
Some of them will fall to-morrow, I hope.
And yet my sky shall not want.
That may be, for you bear a many superfluously, and
twere more honour some were away.
Even as your horse bears your praises; who would
trot as well, were some of your brags dismounted.
Would I were able to load him with his desert! Will
it never be day? I will trot to-morrow a mile, and
my way shall be paved with English faces.
I will not say so, for fear I should be faced out of
my way: but I would it were morning; for I would
fain be about the ears of the English.
Who will go to hazard with me for twenty prisoners?
You must first go yourself to hazard, ere you have them.
Tis midnight; Ill go arm myself.
Exit
The Dauphin longs for morning.
He longs to eat the English.
I think he will eat all he kills.
By the white hand of my lady, hes a gallant prince.
Swear by her foot, that she may tread out the oath.
He is simply the most active gentleman of France.
Doing is activity; and he will still be doing.
He never did harm, that I heard of.
Nor will do none to-morrow: he will keep that good name still.
I know him to be valiant.
I was told that  by one that knows him better than
you.
Whats he?
Marry, he told me so himself; and he said he cared
not who knew it
He needs not; it is no hidden virtue in him.
By my faith, sir, but it is; never any body saw it
but his lackey: tis a hooded valour; and when it
appears, it will bate.
Ill will never said well.
I will cap that proverb with There is flattery in friendship.
And I will take up that with Give the devil his due.
Well placed: there stands your friend for the
devil: have at the very eye of that proverb with A
pox of the devil.
You are the better at proverbs, by how much A
fools bolt is soon shot.
You have shot over.
Tis not the first time you were overshot.
Enter a Messenger
My lord high constable, the English lie within
fifteen hundred paces of your tents.
Who hath measured the ground?
The Lord Grandpre.
A valiant and most expert gentleman. Would it were
day! Alas, poor Harry of England! he longs not for
the dawning as we do.
What a wretched and peevish fellow is this king of
England, to mope with his fat-brained followers so
far out of his knowledge!
If the English had any apprehension, they would run away.
That they lack; for if their heads had any
intellectual armour, they could never wear such heavy
head-pieces.
That island of England breeds very valiant
creatures; their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage.
Foolish curs, that run winking into the mouth of a
Russian bear and have their heads crushed like
rotten apples! You may as well say, thats a
valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion.
Just, just; and the men do sympathize with the
mastiffs in robustious and rough coming on, leaving
their wits with their wives: and then give them
great meals of beef and iron and steel, they will
eat like wolves and fight like devils.
Ay, but these English are shrewdly out of beef.
Then shall we find to-morrow they have only stomachs
to eat and none to fight. Now is it time to arm:
come, shall we about it?
It is now two oclock: but, let me see, by ten
We shall have each a hundred Englishmen.
Exeunt
ACT IV
PROLOGUE
Enter Chorus
Now entertain conjecture of a time
When creeping murmur and the poring dark
Fills the wide vessel of the universe.
From camp to camp through the foul womb of night
The hum of either army stilly sounds,
That the fixed sentinels almost receive
The secret whispers of each others watch:
Fire answers fire, and through their paly flames
Each battle sees the others umberd face;
Steed threatens steed, in high and boastful neighs
Piercing the nights dull ear, and from the tents
The armourers, accomplishing the knights,
With busy hammers closing rivets up,
Give dreadful note of preparation:
The country cocks do crow, the clocks do toll,
And the third hour of drowsy morning name.
Proud of their numbers and secure in soul,
The confident and over-lusty French
Do the low-rated English play at dice;
And chide the cripple tardy-gaited night
Who, like a foul and ugly witch, doth limp
So tediously away. The poor condemned English,
Like sacrifices, by their watchful fires
Sit patiently and inly ruminate
The mornings danger, and their gesture sad
Investing lank-lean; cheeks and war-worn coats
Presenteth them unto the gazing moon
So many horrid ghosts. O now, who will behold
The royal captain of this ruind band
Walking from watch to watch, from tent to tent,
Let him cry Praise and glory on his head!
For forth he goes and visits all his host.
Bids them good morrow with a modest smile
And calls them brothers, friends and countrymen.
Upon his royal face there is no note
How dread an army hath enrounded him;
Nor doth he dedicate one jot of colour
Unto the weary and all-watched night,
But freshly looks and over-bears attaint
With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty;
That every wretch, pining and pale before,
Beholding him, plucks comfort from his looks:
A largess universal like the sun
His liberal eye doth give to every one,
Thawing cold fear, that mean and gentle all,
Behold, as may unworthiness define,
A little touch of Harry in the night.
And so our scene must to the battle fly;
Where--O for pity!--we shall much disgrace
With four or five most vile and ragged foils,
Right ill-disposed in brawl ridiculous,
The name of Agincourt. Yet sit and see,
Minding true things by what their mockeries be.
Exit
SCENE I. The English camp at Agincourt.
Enter KING HENRY, BEDFORD, and GLOUCESTER
Gloucester, tis true that we are in great danger;
The greater therefore should our courage be.
Good morrow, brother Bedford. God Almighty!
There is some soul of goodness in things evil,
Would men observingly distil it out.
For our bad neighbour makes us early stirrers,
Which is both healthful and good husbandry:
Besides, they are our outward consciences,
And preachers to us all, admonishing
That we should dress us fairly for our end.
Thus may we gather honey from the weed,
And make a moral of the devil himself.
Enter ERPINGHAM
Good morrow, old Sir Thomas Erpingham:
A good soft pillow for that good white head
Were better than a churlish turf of France.
Not so, my liege: this lodging likes me better,
Since I may say Now lie I like a king.
Tis good for men to love their present pains
Upon example; so the spirit is eased:
And when the mind is quickend, out of doubt,
The organs, though defunct and dead before,
Break up their drowsy grave and newly move,
With casted slough and fresh legerity.
Lend me thy cloak, Sir Thomas. Brothers both,
Commend me to the princes in our camp;
Do my good morrow to them, and anon
Desire them an to my pavilion.
We shall, my liege.
Shall I attend your grace?
No, my good knight;
Go with my brothers to my lords of England:
I and my bosom must debate awhile,
And then I would no other company.
The Lord in heaven bless thee, noble Harry!
Exeunt all but KING HENRY
God-a-mercy, old heart! thou speakst cheerfully.
Enter PISTOL
Qui va la?
A friend.
Discuss unto me; art thou officer?
Or art thou base, common and popular?
I am a gentleman of a company.
Trailst thou the puissant pike?
Even so. What are you?
As good a gentleman as the emperor.
Then you are a better than the king.
The kings a bawcock, and a heart of gold,
A lad of life, an imp of fame;
Of parents good, of fist most valiant.
I kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string
I love the lovely bully. What is thy name?
Harry le Roy.
Le Roy! a Cornish name: art thou of Cornish crew?
No, I am a Welshman.
Knowst thou Fluellen?
Yes.
Tell him, Ill knock his leek about his pate
Upon Saint Davys day.
Do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day,
lest he knock that about yours.
Art thou his friend?
And his kinsman too.
The figo for thee, then!
I thank you: God be with you!
My name is Pistol calld.
Exit
It sorts well with your fierceness.
Enter FLUELLEN and GOWER
Captain Fluellen!
So! in the name of Jesu Christ, speak lower. It is
the greatest admiration of the universal world, when
the true and aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the
wars is not kept: if you would take the pains but to
examine the wars of Pompey the Great, you shall
find, I warrant you, that there is no tiddle toddle
nor pibble pabble in Pompeys camp; I warrant you,
you shall find the ceremonies of the wars, and the
cares of it, and the forms of it, and the sobriety
of it, and the modesty of it, to be otherwise.
Why, the enemy is loud; you hear him all night.
If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating
coxcomb, is it meet, think you, that we should also,
look you, be an ass and a fool and a prating
coxcomb? in your own conscience, now?
I will speak lower.
I pray you and beseech you that you will.
Exeunt GOWER and FLUELLEN
Though it appear a little out of fashion,
There is much care and valour in this Welshman.
Enter three soldiers, JOHN BATES, ALEXANDER COURT, and MICHAEL WILLIAMS
Brother John Bates, is not that the morning which
breaks yonder?
I think it be: but we have no great cause to desire
the approach of day.
We see yonder the beginning of the day, but I think
we shall never see the end of it. Who goes there?
A friend.
Under what captain serve you?
Under Sir Thomas Erpingham.
A good old commander and a most kind gentleman: I
pray you, what thinks he of our estate?
Even as men wrecked upon a sand, that look to be
washed off the next tide.
He hath not told his thought to the king?
No; nor it is not meet he should. For, though I
speak it to you, I think the king is but a man, as I
am: the violet smells to him as it doth to me: the
element shows to him as it doth to me; all his
senses have but human conditions: his ceremonies
laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man; and
though his affections are higher mounted than ours,
yet, when they stoop, they stoop with the like
wing. Therefore when he sees reason of fears, as we
do, his fears, out of doubt, be of the same relish
as ours are: yet, in reason, no man should possess
him with any appearance of fear, lest he, by showing
it, should dishearten his army.
He may show what outward courage he will; but I
believe, as cold a night as tis, he could wish
himself in Thames up to the neck; and so I would he
were, and I by him, at all adventures, so we were quit here.
By my troth, I will speak my conscience of the king:
I think he would not wish himself any where but
where he is.
Then I would he were here alone; so should he be
sure to be ransomed, and a many poor mens lives saved.
I dare say you love him not so ill, to wish him here
alone, howsoever you speak this to feel other mens
minds: methinks I could not die any where so
contented as in the kings company; his cause being
just and his quarrel honourable.
Thats more than we know.
Ay, or more than we should seek after; for we know
enough, if we know we are the kings subjects: if
his cause be wrong, our obedience to the king wipes
the crime of it out of us.
But if the cause be not good, the king himself hath
a heavy reckoning to make, when all those legs and
arms and heads, chopped off in battle, shall join
together at the latter day and cry all We died at
such a place; some swearing, some crying for a
surgeon, some upon their wives left poor behind
them, some upon the debts they owe, some upon their
children rawly left. I am afeard there are few die
well that die in a battle; for how can they
charitably dispose of any thing, when blood is their
argument? Now, if these men do not die well, it
will be a black matter for the king that led them to
it; whom to disobey were against all proportion of
subjection.
So, if a son that is by his father sent about
merchandise do sinfully miscarry upon the sea, the
imputation of his wickedness by your rule, should be
imposed upon his father that sent him: or if a
servant, under his masters command transporting a
sum of money, be assailed by robbers and die in
many irreconciled iniquities, you may call the
business of the master the author of the servants
damnation: but this is not so: the king is not
bound to answer the particular endings of his
soldiers, the father of his son, nor the master of
his servant; for they purpose not their death, when
they purpose their services. Besides, there is no
king, be his cause never so spotless, if it come to
the arbitrement of swords, can try it out with all
unspotted soldiers: some peradventure have on them
the guilt of premeditated and contrived murder;
some, of beguiling virgins with the broken seals of
perjury; some, making the wars their bulwark, that
have before gored the gentle bosom of peace with
pillage and robbery. Now, if these men have
defeated the law and outrun native punishment,
though they can outstrip men, they have no wings to
fly from God: war is his beadle, war is vengeance;
so that here men are punished for before-breach of
the kings laws in now the kings quarrel: where
they feared the death, they have borne life away;
and where they would be safe, they perish: then if
they die unprovided, no more is the king guilty of
their damnation than he was before guilty of those
impieties for the which they are now visited. Every
subjects duty is the kings; but every subjects
soul is his own. Therefore should every soldier in
the wars do as every sick man in his bed, wash every
mote out of his conscience: and dying so, death
is to him advantage; or not dying, the time was
blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained:
and in him that escapes, it were not sin to think
that, making God so free an offer, He let him
outlive that day to see His greatness and to teach
others how they should prepare.
Tis certain, every man that dies ill, the ill upon
his own head, the king is not to answer it.
But I do not desire he should answer for me; and
yet I determine to fight lustily for him.
I myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed.
Ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully: but
when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed, and we
neer the wiser.
If I live to see it, I will never trust his word after.
You pay him then. Thats a perilous shot out of an
elder-gun, that a poor and private displeasure can
do against a monarch! you may as well go about to
turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a
peacocks feather. Youll never trust his word
after! come, tis a foolish saying.
Your reproof is something too round: I should be
angry with you, if the time were convenient.
Let it be a quarrel between us, if you live.
I embrace it.
How shall I know thee again?
Give me any gage of thine, and I will wear it in my
bonnet: then, if ever thou darest acknowledge it, I
will make it my quarrel.
Heres my glove: give me another of thine.
There.
This will I also wear in my cap: if ever thou come
to me and say, after to-morrow, This is my glove,
by this hand, I will take thee a box on the ear.
If ever I live to see it, I will challenge it.
Thou darest as well be hanged.
Well. I will do it, though I take thee in the
kings company.
Keep thy word: fare thee well.
Be friends, you English fools, be friends: we have
French quarrels enow, if you could tell how to reckon.
Indeed, the French may lay twenty French crowns to
one, they will beat us; for they bear them on their
shoulders: but it is no English treason to cut
French crowns, and to-morrow the king himself will
be a clipper.
Exeunt soldiers
Upon the king! let us our lives, our souls,
Our debts, our careful wives,
Our children and our sins lay on the king!
We must bear all. O hard condition,
Twin-born with greatness, subject to the breath
Of every fool, whose sense no more can feel
But his own wringing! What infinite hearts-ease
Must kings neglect, that private men enjoy!
And what have kings, that privates have not too,
Save ceremony, save general ceremony?
And what art thou, thou idle ceremony?
What kind of god art thou, that sufferst more
Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers?
What are thy rents? what are thy comings in?
O ceremony, show me but thy worth!
What is thy soul of adoration?
Art thou aught else but place, degree and form,
Creating awe and fear in other men?
Wherein thou art less happy being feard
Than they in fearing.
What drinkst thou oft, instead of homage sweet,
But poisond flattery? O, be sick, great greatness,
And bid thy ceremony give thee cure!
Thinkst thou the fiery fever will go out
With titles blown from adulation?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending?
Canst thou, when thou commandst the beggars knee,
Command the health of it? No, thou proud dream,
That playst so subtly with a kings repose;
I am a king that find thee, and I know
Tis not the balm, the sceptre and the ball,
The sword, the mace, the crown imperial,
The intertissued robe of gold and pearl,
The farced title running fore the king,
The throne he sits on, nor the tide of pomp
That beats upon the high shore of this world,
No, not all these, thrice-gorgeous ceremony,
Not all these, laid in bed majestical,
Can sleep so soundly as the wretched slave,
Who with a body filld and vacant mind
Gets him to rest, crammd with distressful bread;
Never sees horrid night, the child of hell,
But, like a lackey, from the rise to set
Sweats in the eye of Phoebus and all night
Sleeps in Elysium; next day after dawn,
Doth rise and help Hyperion to his horse,
And follows so the ever-running year,
With profitable labour, to his grave:
And, but for ceremony, such a wretch,
Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep,
Had the fore-hand and vantage of a king.
The slave, a member of the countrys peace,
Enjoys it; but in gross brain little wots
What watch the king keeps to maintain the peace,
Whose hours the peasant best advantages.
Enter ERPINGHAM
My lord, your nobles, jealous of your absence,
Seek through your camp to find you.
Good old knight,
Collect them all together at my tent:
Ill be before thee.
I shall dot, my lord.
Exit
O God of battles! steel my soldiers hearts;
Possess them not with fear; take from them now
The sense of reckoning, if the opposed numbers
Pluck their hearts from them. Not to-day, O Lord,
O, not to-day, think not upon the fault
My father made in compassing the crown!
I Richards body have interred anew;
And on it have bestowd more contrite tears
Than from it issued forced drops of blood:
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay,
Who twice a-day their witherd hands hold up
Toward heaven, to pardon blood; and I have built
Two chantries, where the sad and solemn priests
Sing still for Richards soul. More will I do;
Though all that I can do is nothing worth,
Since that my penitence comes after all,
Imploring pardon.
Enter GLOUCESTER
My liege!
My brother Gloucesters voice? Ay;
I know thy errand, I will go with thee:
The day, my friends and all things stay for me.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The French camp.
Enter the DAUPHIN, ORLEANS, RAMBURES, and others
The sun doth gild our armour; up, my lords!
Montez A cheval! My horse! varlet! laquais! ha!
O brave spirit!
Via! les eaux et la terre.
Rien puis? Lair et la feu.
Ciel, cousin Orleans.
Enter Constable
Now, my lord constable!
Hark, how our steeds for present service neigh!
Mount them, and make incision in their hides,
That their hot blood may spin in English eyes,
And dout them with superfluous courage, ha!
What, will you have them weep our horses blood?
How shall we, then, behold their natural tears?
Enter Messenger
The English are embattled, you French peers.
To horse, you gallant princes! straight to horse!
Do but behold yon poor and starved band,
And your fair show shall suck away their souls,
Leaving them but the shales and husks of men.
There is not work enough for all our hands;
Scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins
To give each naked curtle-axe a stain,
That our French gallants shall to-day draw out,
And sheathe for lack of sport: let us but blow on them,
The vapour of our valour will oerturn them.
Tis positive gainst all exceptions, lords,
That our superfluous lackeys and our peasants,
Who in unnecessary action swarm
About our squares of battle, were enow
To purge this field of such a hilding foe,
Though we upon this mountains basis by
Took stand for idle speculation:
But that our honours must not. Whats to say?
A very little little let us do.
And all is done. Then let the trumpets sound
The tucket sonance and the note to mount;
For our approach shall so much dare the field
That England shall couch down in fear and yield.
Enter GRANDPRE
Why do you stay so long, my lords of France?
Yon island carrions, desperate of their bones,
Ill-favouredly become the morning field:
Their ragged curtains poorly are let loose,
And our air shakes them passing scornfully:
Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggard host
And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps:
The horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks,
With torch-staves in their hand; and their poor jades
Lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips,
The gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes
And in their pale dull mouths the gimmal bit
Lies foul with chewd grass, still and motionless;
And their executors, the knavish crows,
Fly oer them, all impatient for their hour.
Description cannot suit itself in words
To demonstrate the life of such a battle
In life so lifeless as it shows itself.
They have said their prayers, and they stay for death.
Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits
And give their fasting horses provender,
And after fight with them?
I stay but for my guidon: to the field!
I will the banner from a trumpet take,
And use it for my haste. Come, come, away!
The sun is high, and we outwear the day.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The English camp.
Enter GLOUCESTER, BEDFORD, EXETER, ERPINGHAM, with all his host: SALISBURY and WESTMORELAND
Where is the king?
The king himself is rode to view their battle.
Of fighting men they have full three score thousand.
Theres five to one; besides, they all are fresh.
Gods arm strike with us! tis a fearful odds.
God be wi you, princes all; Ill to my charge:
If we no more meet till we meet in heaven,
Then, joyfully, my noble Lord of Bedford,
My dear Lord Gloucester, and my good Lord Exeter,
And my kind kinsman, warriors all, adieu!
Farewell, good Salisbury; and good luck go with thee!
Farewell, kind lord; fight valiantly to-day:
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it,
For thou art framed of the firm truth of valour.
Exit SALISBURY
He is full of valour as of kindness;
Princely in both.
Enter the KING
O that we now had here
But one ten thousand of those men in England
That do no work to-day!
Whats he that wishes so?
My cousin Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin:
If we are markd to die, we are enow
To do our country loss; and if to live,
The fewer men, the greater share of honour.
Gods will! I pray thee, wish not one man more.
By Jove, I am not covetous for gold,
Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost;
It yearns me not if men my garments wear;
Such outward things dwell not in my desires:
But if it be a sin to covet honour,
I am the most offending soul alive.
No, faith, my coz, wish not a man from England:
Gods peace! I would not lose so great an honour
As one man more, methinks, would share from me
For the best hope I have. O, do not wish one more!
Rather proclaim it, Westmoreland, through my host,
That he which hath no stomach to this fight,
Let him depart; his passport shall be made
And crowns for convoy put into his purse:
We would not die in that mans company
That fears his fellowship to die with us.
This day is called the feast of Crispian:
He that outlives this day, and comes safe home,
Will stand a tip-toe when the day is named,
And rouse him at the name of Crispian.
He that shall live this day, and see old age,
Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbours,
And say To-morrow is Saint Crispian:
Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars.
And say These wounds I had on Crispins day.
Old men forget: yet all shall be forgot,
But hell remember with advantages
What feats he did that day: then shall our names.
Familiar in his mouth as household words
Harry the king, Bedford and Exeter,
Warwick and Talbot, Salisbury and Gloucester,
Be in their flowing cups freshly rememberd.
This story shall the good man teach his son;
And Crispin Crispian shall neer go by,
From this day to the ending of the world,
But we in it shall be rememberd;
We few, we happy few, we band of brothers;
For he to-day that sheds his blood with me
Shall be my brother; be he neer so vile,
This day shall gentle his condition:
And gentlemen in England now a-bed
Shall think themselves accursed they were not here,
And hold their manhoods cheap whiles any speaks
That fought with us upon Saint Crispins day.
Re-enter SALISBURY
My sovereign lord, bestow yourself with speed:
The French are bravely in their battles set,
And will with all expedience charge on us.
All things are ready, if our minds be so.
