Perish the man whose mind is backward now!
Thou dost not wish more help from England, coz?
Gods will! my liege, would you and I alone,
Without more help, could fight this royal battle!
Why, now thou hast unwishd five thousand men;
Which likes me better than to wish us one.
You know your places: God be with you all!
Tucket. Enter MONTJOY
Once more I come to know of thee, King Harry,
If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound,
Before thy most assured overthrow:
For certainly thou art so near the gulf,
Thou needs must be englutted. Besides, in mercy,
The constable desires thee thou wilt mind
Thy followers of repentance; that their souls
May make a peaceful and a sweet retire
From off these fields, where, wretches, their poor bodies
Must lie and fester.
Who hath sent thee now?
The Constable of France.
I pray thee, bear my former answer back:
Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones.
Good God! why should they mock poor fellows thus?
The man that once did sell the lions skin
While the beast lived, was killed with hunting him.
A many of our bodies shall no doubt
Find native graves; upon the which, I trust,
Shall witness live in brass of this days work:
And those that leave their valiant bones in France,
Dying like men, though buried in your dunghills,
They shall be famed; for there the sun shall greet them,
And draw their honours reeking up to heaven;
Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime,
The smell whereof shall breed a plague in France.
Mark then abounding valour in our English,
That being dead, like to the bullets grazing,
Break out into a second course of mischief,
Killing in relapse of mortality.
Let me speak proudly: tell the constable
We are but warriors for the working-day;
Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirchd
With rainy marching in the painful field;
Theres not a piece of feather in our host--
Good argument, I hope, we will not fly--
And time hath worn us into slovenry:
But, by the mass, our hearts are in the trim;
And my poor soldiers tell me, yet ere night
Theyll be in fresher robes, or they will pluck
The gay new coats oer the French soldiers heads
And turn them out of service. If they do this,--
As, if God please, they shall,--my ransom then
Will soon be levied. Herald, save thou thy labour;
Come thou no more for ransom, gentle herald:
They shall have none, I swear, but these my joints;
Which if they have as I will leave em them,
Shall yield them little, tell the constable.
I shall, King Harry. And so fare thee well:
Thou never shalt hear herald any more.
Exit
I fear thoult once more come again for ransom.
Enter YORK
My lord, most humbly on my knee I beg
The leading of the vaward.
Take it, brave York. Now, soldiers, march away:
And how thou pleasest, God, dispose the day!
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The field of battle.
Alarum. Excursions. Enter PISTOL, French Soldier, and Boy
Yield, cur!
Je pense que vous etes gentilhomme de bonne qualite.
Qualtitie calmie custure me! Art thou a gentleman?
what is thy name? discuss.
O Seigneur Dieu!
O, Signieur Dew should be a gentleman:
Perpend my words, O Signieur Dew, and mark;
O Signieur Dew, thou diest on point of fox,
Except, O signieur, thou do give to me
Egregious ransom.
O, prenez misericorde! ayez pitie de moi!
Moy shall not serve; I will have forty moys;
Or I will fetch thy rim out at thy throat
In drops of crimson blood.
Est-il impossible dechapper la force de ton bras?
Brass, cur!
Thou damned and luxurious mountain goat,
Offerst me brass?
O pardonnez moi!
Sayst thou me so? is that a ton of moys?
Come hither, boy: ask me this slave in French
What is his name.
Ecoutez: comment etes-vous appele?
Monsieur le Fer.
He says his name is Master Fer.
Master Fer! Ill fer him, and firk him, and ferret
him: discuss the same in French unto him.
I do not know the French for fer, and ferret, and firk.
Bid him prepare; for I will cut his throat.
Que dit-il, monsieur?
Il me commande de vous dire que vous faites vous
pret; car ce soldat ici est dispose tout a cette
heure de couper votre gorge.
Owy, cuppele gorge, permafoy,
Peasant, unless thou give me crowns, brave crowns;
Or mangled shalt thou be by this my sword.
O, je vous supplie, pour lamour de Dieu, me
pardonner! Je suis gentilhomme de bonne maison:
gardez ma vie, et je vous donnerai deux cents ecus.
What are his words?
He prays you to save his life: he is a gentleman of
a good house; and for his ransom he will give you
two hundred crowns.
Tell him my fury shall abate, and I the crowns will take.
Petit monsieur, que dit-il?
Encore quil est contre son jurement de pardonner
aucun prisonnier, neanmoins, pour les ecus que vous
lavez promis, il est content de vous donner la
liberte, le franchisement.
Sur mes genoux je vous donne mille remercimens; et
je mestime heureux que je suis tombe entre les
mains dun chevalier, je pense, le plus brave,
vaillant, et tres distingue seigneur dAngleterre.
Expound unto me, boy.
He gives you, upon his knees, a thousand thanks; and
he esteems himself happy that he hath fallen into
the hands of one, as he thinks, the most brave,
valorous, and thrice-worthy signieur of England.
As I suck blood, I will some mercy show.
Follow me!
Suivez-vous le grand capitaine.
Exeunt PISTOL, and French Soldier
I did never know so full a voice issue from so
empty a heart: but the saying is true The empty
vessel makes the greatest sound. Bardolph and Nym
had ten times more valour than this roaring devil i
the old play, that every one may pare his nails with
a wooden dagger; and they are both hanged; and so
would this be, if he durst steal any thing
adventurously. I must stay with the lackeys, with
the luggage of our camp: the French might have a
good prey of us, if he knew of it; for there is
none to guard it but boys.
Exit
SCENE V. Another part of the field.
Enter Constable, ORLEANS, BOURBON, DAUPHIN, and RAMBURES
O diable!
O seigneur! le jour est perdu, tout est perdu!
Mort de ma vie! all is confounded, all!
Reproach and everlasting shame
Sits mocking in our plumes. O merchante fortune!
Do not run away.
A short alarum
Why, all our ranks are broke.
O perdurable shame! lets stab ourselves.
Be these the wretches that we playd at dice for?
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom?
Shame and eternal shame, nothing but shame!
Let us die in honour: once more back again;
And he that will not follow Bourbon now,
Let him go hence, and with his cap in hand,
Like a base pander, hold the chamber-door
Whilst by a slave, no gentler than my dog,
His fairest daughter is contaminated.
Disorder, that hath spoild us, friend us now!
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives.
We are enow yet living in the field
To smother up the English in our throngs,
If any order might be thought upon.
The devil take order now! Ill to the throng:
Let life be short; else shame will be too long.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Another part of the field.
Alarums. Enter KING HENRY and forces, EXETER, and others
Well have we done, thrice valiant countrymen:
But alls not done; yet keep the French the field.
The Duke of York commends him to your majesty.
Lives he, good uncle? thrice within this hour
I saw him down; thrice up again and fighting;
From helmet to the spur all blood he was.
In which array, brave soldier, doth he lie,
Larding the plain; and by his bloody side,
Yoke-fellow to his honour-owing wounds,
The noble Earl of Suffolk also lies.
Suffolk first died: and York, all haggled over,
Comes to him, where in gore he lay insteepd,
And takes him by the beard; kisses the gashes
That bloodily did spawn upon his face;
And cries aloud Tarry, dear cousin Suffolk!
My soul shall thine keep company to heaven;
Tarry, sweet soul, for mine, then fly abreast,
As in this glorious and well-foughten field
We kept together in our chivalry!
Upon these words I came and cheerd him up:
He smiled me in the face, raught me his hand,
And, with a feeble gripe, says Dear my lord,
Commend my service to me sovereign.
So did he turn and over Suffolks neck
He threw his wounded arm and kissd his lips;
And so espoused to death, with blood he seald
A testament of noble-ending love.
The pretty and sweet manner of it forced
Those waters from me which I would have stoppd;
But I had not so much of man in me,
And all my mother came into mine eyes
And gave me up to tears.
I blame you not;
For, hearing this, I must perforce compound
With mistful eyes, or they will issue too.
Alarum
But, hark! what new alarum is this same?
The French have reinforced their scatterd men:
Then every soldier kill his prisoners:
Give the word through.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Another part of the field.
Enter FLUELLEN and GOWER
Kill the poys and the luggage! tis expressly
against the law of arms: tis as arrant a piece of
knavery, mark you now, as can be offert; in your
conscience, now, is it not?
Tis certain theres not a boy left alive; and the
cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha done
this slaughter: besides, they have burned and
carried away all that was in the kings tent;
wherefore the king, most worthily, hath caused every
soldier to cut his prisoners throat. O, tis a
gallant king!
Ay, he was porn at Monmouth, Captain Gower. What
call you the towns name where Alexander the Pig was born!
Alexander the Great.
Why, I pray you, is not pig great? the pig, or the
great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the
magnanimous, are all one reckonings, save the phrase
is a little variations.
I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon; his
father was called Philip of Macedon, as I take it.
I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn. I
tell you, captain, if you look in the maps of the
orld, I warrant you sall find, in the comparisons
between Macedon and Monmouth, that the situations,
look you, is both alike. There is a river in
Macedon; and there is also moreover a river at
Monmouth: it is called Wye at Monmouth; but it is
out of my prains what is the name of the other
river; but tis all one, tis alike as my fingers is
to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. If you
mark Alexanders life well, Harry of Monmouths life
is come after it indifferent well; for there is
figures in all things. Alexander, God knows, and
you know, in his rages, and his furies, and his
wraths, and his cholers, and his moods, and his
displeasures, and his indignations, and also being a
little intoxicates in his prains, did, in his ales and
his angers, look you, kill his best friend, Cleitus.
Our king is not like him in that: he never killed
any of his friends.
It is not well done, mark you now take the tales out
of my mouth, ere it is made and finished. I speak
but in the figures and comparisons of it: as
Alexander killed his friend Cleitus, being in his
ales and his cups; so also Harry Monmouth, being in
his right wits and his good judgments, turned away
the fat knight with the great belly-doublet: he
was full of jests, and gipes, and knaveries, and
mocks; I have forgot his name.
Sir John Falstaff.
That is he: Ill tell you there is good men porn at Monmouth.
Here comes his majesty.
Alarum. Enter KING HENRY, and forces; WARWICK, GLOUCESTER, EXETER, and others
I was not angry since I came to France
Until this instant. Take a trumpet, herald;
Ride thou unto the horsemen on yon hill:
If they will fight with us, bid them come down,
Or void the field; they do offend our sight:
If theyll do neither, we will come to them,
And make them skirr away, as swift as stones
Enforced from the old Assyrian slings:
Besides, well cut the throats of those we have,
And not a man of them that we shall take
Shall taste our mercy. Go and tell them so.
Enter MONTJOY
Here comes the herald of the French, my liege.
His eyes are humbler than they used to be.
How now! what means this, herald? knowst thou not
That I have  fined these bones of mine for ransom?
Comest thou again for ransom?
No, great king:
I come to thee for charitable licence,
That we may wander oer this bloody field
To look our dead, and then to bury them;
To sort our nobles from our common men.
For many of our princes--woe the while!--
Lie drownd and soakd in mercenary blood;
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs
In blood of princes; and their wounded steeds
Fret fetlock deep in gore and with wild rage
Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters,
Killing them twice. O, give us leave, great king,
To view the field in safety and dispose
Of their dead bodies!
I tell thee truly, herald,
I know not if the day be ours or no;
For yet a many of your horsemen peer
And gallop oer the field.
The day is yours.
Praised be God, and not our strength, for it!
What is this castle calld that stands hard by?
They call it Agincourt.
Then call we this the field of Agincourt,
Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus.
Your grandfather of famous memory, ant please your
majesty, and your great-uncle Edward the Plack
Prince of Wales, as I have read in the chronicles,
fought a most prave pattle here in France.
They did, Fluellen.
Your majesty says very true: if your majesties is
remembered of it, the Welshmen did good service in a
garden where leeks did grow, wearing leeks in their
Monmouth caps; which, your majesty know, to this
hour is an honourable badge of the service; and I do
believe your majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek
upon Saint Tavys day.
I wear it for a memorable honour;
For I am Welsh, you know, good countryman.
All the water in Wye cannot wash your majestys
Welsh plood out of your pody, I can tell you that:
God pless it and preserve it, as long as it pleases
his grace, and his majesty too!
Thanks, good my countryman.
By Jeshu, I am your majestys countryman, I care not
who know it; I will confess it to all the orld: I
need not to be ashamed of your majesty, praised be
God, so long as your majesty is an honest man.
God keep me so! Our heralds go with him:
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead
On both our parts. Call yonder fellow hither.
Points to WILLIAMS. Exeunt Heralds with Montjoy
Soldier, you must come to the king.
Soldier, why wearest thou that glove in thy cap?
Ant please your majesty, tis the gage of one that
I should fight withal, if he be alive.
An Englishman?
Ant please your majesty, a rascal that swaggered
with me last night; who, if alive and ever dare to
challenge this glove, I have sworn to take him a box
o th ear: or if I can see my glove in his cap,
which he swore, as he was a soldier, he would wear
if alive, I will strike it out soundly.
What think you, Captain Fluellen? is it fit this
soldier keep his oath?
He is a craven and a villain else, ant please your
majesty, in my conscience.
It may be his enemy is a gentleman of great sort,
quite from the answer of his degree.
Though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is, as
Lucifer and Belzebub himself, it is necessary, look
your grace, that he keep his vow and his oath: if
he be perjured, see you now, his reputation is as
arrant a villain and a Jacksauce, as ever his black
shoe trod upon Gods ground and his earth, in my
conscience, la!
Then keep thy vow, sirrah, when thou meetest the fellow.
So I will, my liege, as I live.
Who servest thou under?
Under Captain Gower, my liege.
Gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and
literatured in the wars.
Call him hither to me, soldier.
I will, my liege.
Exit
Here, Fluellen; wear thou this favour for me and
stick it in thy cap: when Alencon and myself were
down together, I plucked this glove from his helm:
if any man challenge this, he is a friend to
Alencon, and an enemy to our person; if thou
encounter any such, apprehend him, an thou dost me love.
Your grace doos me as great honours as can be
desired in the hearts of his subjects: I would fain
see the man, that has but two legs, that shall find
himself aggrieved at this glove; that is all; but I
would fain see it once, an please God of his grace
that I might see.
Knowest thou Gower?
He is my dear friend, an please you.
Pray thee, go seek him, and bring him to my tent.
I will fetch him.
Exit
My Lord of Warwick, and my brother Gloucester,
Follow Fluellen closely at the heels:
The glove which I have given him for a favour
May haply purchase him a box o th ear;
It is the soldiers; I by bargain should
Wear it myself. Follow, good cousin Warwick:
If that the soldier strike him, as I judge
By his blunt bearing he will keep his word,
Some sudden mischief may arise of it;
For I do know Fluellen valiant
And, touched with choler, hot as gunpowder,
And quickly will return an injury:
Follow and see there be no harm between them.
Go you with me, uncle of Exeter.
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. Before KING HENRYS pavilion.
Enter GOWER and WILLIAMS
I warrant it is to knight you, captain.
Enter FLUELLEN
Gods will and his pleasure, captain, I beseech you
now, come apace to the king: there is more good
toward you peradventure than is in your knowledge to dream of.
Sir, know you this glove?
Know the glove! I know the glove is glove.
I know this; and thus I challenge it.
Strikes him
Sblood! an arrant traitor as any is in the
universal world, or in France, or in England!
How now, sir! you villain!
Do you think Ill be forsworn?
Stand away, Captain Gower; I will give treason his
payment into ploughs, I warrant you.
I am no traitor.
Thats a lie in thy throat. I charge you in his
majestys name, apprehend him: hes a friend of the
Duke Alencons.
Enter WARWICK and GLOUCESTER
How now, how now! whats the matter?
My Lord of Warwick, here is--praised be God for it!
--a most contagious treason come to light, look
you, as you shall desire in a summers day. Here is
his majesty.
Enter KING HENRY and EXETER
How now! whats the matter?
My liege, here is a villain and a traitor, that,
look your grace, has struck the glove which your
majesty is take out of the helmet of Alencon.
My liege, this was my glove; here is the fellow of
it; and he that I gave it to in change promised to
wear it in his cap: I promised to strike him, if he
did: I met this man with my glove in his cap, and I
have been as good as my word.
Your majesty hear now, saving your majestys
manhood, what an arrant, rascally, beggarly, lousy
knave it is: I hope your majesty is pear me
testimony and witness, and will avouchment, that
this is the glove of Alencon, that your majesty is
give me; in your conscience, now?
Give me thy glove, soldier: look, here is the
fellow of it.
Twas I, indeed, thou promisedst to strike;
And thou hast given me most bitter terms.
An please your majesty, let his neck answer for it,
if there is any martial law in the world.
How canst thou make me satisfaction?
All offences, my lord, come from the heart: never
came any from mine that might offend your majesty.
It was ourself thou didst abuse.
Your majesty came not like yourself: you appeared to
me but as a common man; witness the night, your
garments, your lowliness; and what your highness
suffered under that shape, I beseech you take it for
your own fault and not mine: for had you been as I
took you for, I made no offence; therefore, I
beseech your highness, pardon me.
Here, uncle Exeter, fill this glove with crowns,
And give it to this fellow. Keep it, fellow;
And wear it for an honour in thy cap
Till I do challenge it. Give him the crowns:
And, captain, you must needs be friends with him.
By this day and this light, the fellow has mettle
enough in his belly. Hold, there is twelve pence
for you; and I pray you to serve Got, and keep you
out of prawls, and prabbles and quarrels, and
dissensions, and, I warrant you, it is the better for you.
I will none of your money.
It is with a good will; I can tell you, it will
serve you to mend your shoes: come, wherefore should
you be so pashful? your shoes is not so good: tis
a good silling, I warrant you, or I will change it.
Enter an English Herald
Now, herald, are the dead numberd?
Here is the number of the slaughterd French.
What prisoners of good sort are taken, uncle?
Charles Duke of Orleans, nephew to the king;
John Duke of Bourbon, and Lord Bouciqualt:
Of other lords and barons, knights and squires,
Full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
This note doth tell me of ten thousand French
That in the field lie slain: of princes, in this number,
And nobles bearing banners, there lie dead
One hundred twenty six: added to these,
Of knights, esquires, and gallant gentlemen,
Eight thousand and four hundred; of the which,
Five hundred were but yesterday dubbd knights:
So that, in these ten thousand they have lost,
There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries;
The rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires,
And gentlemen of blood and quality.
The names of those their nobles that lie dead:
Charles Delabreth, high constable of France;
Jaques of Chatillon, admiral of France;
The master of the cross-bows, Lord Rambures;
Great Master of France, the brave Sir Guichard Dolphin,
John Duke of Alencon, Anthony Duke of Brabant,
The brother of the Duke of Burgundy,
And Edward Duke of Bar: of lusty earls,
Grandpre and Roussi, Fauconberg and Foix,
Beaumont and Marle, Vaudemont and Lestrale.
Here was a royal fellowship of death!
Where is the number of our English dead?
Herald shews him another paper
Edward the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk,
Sir Richard Ketly, Davy Gam, esquire:
None else of name; and of all other men
But five and twenty. O God, thy arm was here;
And not to us, but to thy arm alone,
Ascribe we all! When, without stratagem,
But in plain shock and even play of battle,
Was ever known so great and little loss
On one part and on the other? Take it, God,
For it is none but thine!
Tis wonderful!
Come, go we in procession to the village.
And be it death proclaimed through our host
To boast of this or take the praise from God
Which is his only.
Is it not lawful, an please your majesty, to tell
how many is killed?
Yes, captain; but with this acknowledgement,
That God fought for us.
Yes, my conscience, he did us great good.
Do we all holy rites;
Let there be sung Non nobis and Te Deum;
The dead with charity enclosed in clay:
And then to Calais; and to England then:
Where neer from France arrived more happy men.
Exeunt
ACT V
PROLOGUE
Enter Chorus
Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story,
That I may prompt them: and of such as have,
I humbly pray them to admit the excuse
Of time, of numbers and due course of things,
Which cannot in their huge and proper life
Be here presented. Now we bear the king
Toward Calais: grant him there; there seen,
Heave him away upon your winged thoughts
Athwart the sea. Behold, the English beach
Pales in the flood with men, with wives and boys,
Whose shouts and claps out-voice the deep mouthd sea,
Which like a mighty whiffler fore the king
Seems to prepare his way: so let him land,
And solemnly see him set on to London.
So swift a pace hath thought that even now
You may imagine him upon Blackheath;
Where that his lords desire him to have borne
His bruised helmet and his bended sword
Before him through the city: he forbids it,
Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride;
Giving full trophy, signal and ostent
Quite from himself to God. But now behold,
In the quick forge and working-house of thought,
How London doth pour out her citizens!
The mayor and all his brethren in best sort,
Like to the senators of the antique Rome,
With the plebeians swarming at their heels,
Go forth and fetch their conquering Caesar in:
As, by a lower but loving likelihood,
Were now the general of our gracious empress,
As in good time he may, from Ireland coming,
Bringing rebellion broached on his sword,
How many would the peaceful city quit,
To welcome him! much more, and much more cause,
Did they this Harry. Now in London place him;
As yet the lamentation of the French
Invites the King of Englands stay at home;
The emperors coming in behalf of France,
To order peace between them; and omit
All the occurrences, whatever chanced,
Till Harrys back-return again to France:
There must we bring him; and myself have playd
The interim, by remembering you tis past.
Then brook abridgment, and your eyes advance,
After your thoughts, straight back again to France.
Exit
SCENE I. France. The English camp.
Enter FLUELLEN and GOWER
Nay, thats right; but why wear you your leek today?
Saint Davys day is past.
There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in
all things: I will tell you, asse my friend,
Captain Gower: the rascally, scald, beggarly,
lousy, pragging knave, Pistol, which you and
yourself and all the world know to be no petter
than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is
come to me and prings me pread and salt yesterday,
look you, and bid me eat my leek: it was in place
where I could not breed no contention with him; but
I will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till I see
him once again, and then I will tell him a little
piece of my desires.
Enter PISTOL
Why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.
Tis no matter for his swellings nor his
turkey-cocks. God pless you, Aunchient Pistol! you
scurvy, lousy knave, God pless you!
Ha! art thou bedlam? dost thou thirst, base Trojan,
To have me fold up Parcas fatal web?
Hence! I am qualmish at the smell of leek.
I peseech you heartily, scurvy, lousy knave, at my
desires, and my requests, and my petitions, to eat,
look you, this leek: because, look you, you do not
love it, nor your affections and your appetites and
your digestions doos not agree with it, I would
desire you to eat it.
Not for Cadwallader and all his goats.
There is one goat for you.
Strikes him
Will you be so good, scauld knave, as eat it?
Base Trojan, thou shalt die.
You say very true, scauld knave, when Gods will is:
I will desire you to live in the mean time, and eat
your victuals: come, there is sauce for it.
Strikes him
You called me yesterday mountain-squire; but I will
make you to-day a squire of low degree. I pray you,
fall to: if you can mock a leek, you can eat a leek.
Enough, captain: you have astonished him.
I say, I will make him eat some part of my leek, or
I will peat his pate four days. Bite, I pray you; it
is good for your green wound and your ploody coxcomb.
Must I bite?
Yes, certainly, and out of doubt and out of question
too, and ambiguities.
By this leek, I will most horribly revenge: I eat
and eat, I swear--
Eat, I pray you: will you have some more sauce to
your leek? there is not enough leek to swear by.
Quiet thy cudgel; thou dost see I eat.
Much good do you, scauld knave, heartily. Nay, pray
you, throw none away; the skin is good for your
broken coxcomb. When you take occasions to see leeks
hereafter, I pray you, mock at em; that is all.
Good.
Ay, leeks is good: hold you, there is a groat to
heal your pate.
Me a groat!
Yes, verily and in truth, you shall take it; or I
have another leek in my pocket, which you shall eat.
I take thy groat in earnest of revenge.
If I owe you any thing, I will pay you in cudgels:
you shall be a woodmonger, and buy nothing of me but
cudgels. God b wi you, and keep you, and heal your pate.
Exit
All hell shall stir for this.
Go, go; you are a counterfeit cowardly knave. Will
you mock at an ancient tradition, begun upon an
honourable respect, and worn as a memorable trophy of
predeceased valour and dare not avouch in your deeds
any of your words? I have seen you gleeking and
galling at this gentleman twice or thrice. You
thought, because he could not speak English in the
native garb, he could not therefore handle an
English cudgel: you find it otherwise; and
henceforth let a Welsh correction teach you a good
English condition. Fare ye well.
Exit
Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now?
News have I, that my Nell is dead i the spital
Of malady of France;
And there my rendezvous is quite cut off.
Old I do wax; and from my weary limbs
Honour is cudgelled. Well, bawd Ill turn,
And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand.
To England will I steal, and there Ill steal:
And patches will I get unto these cudgelld scars,
And swear I got them in the Gallia wars.
Exit
SCENE II. France. A royal palace.
Enter, at one door KING HENRY, EXETER, BEDFORD,  GLOUCESTER, WARWICK, WESTMORELAND, and other Lords;  at another, the FRENCH KING, QUEEN ISABEL, the  PRINCESS KATHARINE, ALICE and other Ladies; the DUKE of BURGUNDY, and his train
Peace to this meeting, wherefore we are met!
Unto our brother France, and to our sister,
Health and fair time of day; joy and good wishes
To our most fair and princely cousin Katharine;
And, as a branch and member of this royalty,
By whom this great assembly is contrived,
We do salute you, Duke of Burgundy;
And, princes French, and peers, health to you all!
Right joyous are we to behold your face,
Most worthy brother England; fairly met:
So are you, princes English, every one.
So happy be the issue, brother England,
Of this good day and of this gracious meeting,
As we are now glad to behold your eyes;
Your eyes, which hitherto have borne in them
Against the French, that met them in their bent,
The fatal balls of murdering basilisks:
The venom of such looks, we fairly hope,
Have lost their quality, and that this day
Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.
To cry amen to that, thus we appear.
You English princes all, I do salute you.
My duty to you both, on equal love,
Great Kings of France and England! That I have labourd,
With all my wits, my pains and strong endeavours,
To bring your most imperial majesties
Unto this bar and royal interview,
Your mightiness on both parts best can witness.
Since then my office hath so far prevaild
That, face to face and royal eye to eye,
You have congreeted, let it not disgrace me,
If I demand, before this royal view,
What rub or what impediment there is,
Why that the naked, poor and mangled Peace,
Dear nurse of arts and joyful births,
Should not in this best garden of the world
Our fertile France, put up her lovely visage?
Alas, she hath from France too long been chased,
And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps,
Corrupting in its own fertility.
Her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart,
Unpruned dies; her hedges even-pleachd,
Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair,
Put forth disorderd twigs; her fallow leas
The darnel, hemlock and rank fumitory
Doth root upon, while that the coulter rusts
That should deracinate such savagery;
The even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth
The freckled cowslip, burnet and green clover,
Wanting the scythe, all uncorrected, rank,
Conceives by idleness and nothing teems
But hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burs,
Losing both beauty and utility.
And as our vineyards, fallows, meads and hedges,
Defective in their natures, grow to wildness,
Even so our houses and ourselves and children
Have lost, or do not learn for want of time,
The sciences that should become our country;
But grow like savages,--as soldiers will
That nothing do but meditate on blood,--
To swearing and stern looks, diffused attire
And every thing that seems unnatural.
Which to reduce into our former favour
You are assembled: and my speech entreats
That I may know the let, why gentle Peace
Should not expel these inconveniences
And bless us with her former qualities.
If, Duke of Burgundy, you would the peace,
Whose want gives growth to the imperfections
Which you have cited, you must buy that peace
With full accord to all our just demands;
Whose tenors and particular effects
You have enscheduled briefly in your hands.
The king hath heard them; to the which as yet
There is no answer made.
Well then the peace,
Which you before so urged, lies in his answer.
I have but with a cursorary eye
Oerglanced the articles: pleaseth your grace
To appoint some of your council presently
To sit with us once more, with better heed
To re-survey them, we will suddenly
Pass our accept and peremptory answer.
Brother, we shall. Go, uncle Exeter,
And brother Clarence, and you, brother Gloucester,
Warwick and Huntingdon, go with the king;
And take with you free power to ratify,
Augment, or alter, as your wisdoms best
Shall see advantageable for our dignity,
Any thing in or out of our demands,
And well consign thereto. Will you, fair sister,
Go with the princes, or stay here with us?
Our gracious brother, I will go with them:
Haply a womans voice may do some good,
When articles too nicely urged be stood on.
Yet leave our cousin Katharine here with us:
She is our capital demand, comprised
Within the fore-rank of our articles.
She hath good leave.
Exeunt all except HENRY, KATHARINE, and ALICE
Fair Katharine, and most fair,
Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms
Such as will enter at a ladys ear
And plead his love-suit to her gentle heart?
Your majesty shall mock at me; I cannot speak your England.
O fair Katharine, if you will love me soundly with
your French heart, I will be glad to hear you
confess it brokenly with your English tongue. Do
you like me, Kate?
Pardonnez-moi, I cannot tell vat is like me.
An angel is like you, Kate, and you are like an angel.
Que dit-il? que je suis semblable a les anges?
Oui, vraiment, sauf votre grace, ainsi dit-il.
I said so, dear Katharine; and I must not blush to
affirm it.
O bon Dieu! les langues des hommes sont pleines de
tromperies.
What says she, fair one? that the tongues of men
are full of deceits?
Oui, dat de tongues of de mans is be full of
deceits: dat is de princess.
The princess is the better Englishwoman. I faith,
Kate, my wooing is fit for thy understanding: I am
glad thou canst speak no better English; for, if
thou couldst, thou wouldst find me such a plain king
that thou wouldst think I had sold my farm to buy my
crown. I know no ways to mince it in love, but
directly to say I love you: then if you urge me
farther than to say do you in faith? I wear out
my suit. Give me your answer; i faith, do: and so
clap hands and a bargain: how say you, lady?
Sauf votre honneur, me understand vell.
Marry, if you would put me to verses or to dance for
your sake, Kate, why you undid me: for the one, I
have neither words nor measure, and for the other, I
have no strength in measure, yet a reasonable
measure in strength. If I could win a lady at
leap-frog, or by vaulting into my saddle with my
armour on my back, under the correction of bragging
be it spoken. I should quickly leap into a wife.
Or if I might buffet for my love, or bound my horse
for her favours, I could lay on like a butcher and
sit like a jack-an-apes, never off. But, before God,
Kate, I cannot look greenly nor gasp out my
eloquence, nor I have no cunning in protestation;
only downright oaths, which I never use till urged,
nor never break for urging. If thou canst love a
fellow of this temper, Kate, whose face is not worth
sun-burning, that never looks in his glass for love
of any thing he sees there, let thine eye be thy
cook. I speak to thee plain soldier: If thou canst
love me for this, take me: if not, to say to thee
that I shall die, is true; but for thy love, by the
Lord, no; yet I love thee too. And while thou
livest, dear Kate, take a fellow of plain and
uncoined constancy; for he perforce must do thee
right, because he hath not the gift to woo in other
places: for these fellows of infinite tongue, that
can rhyme themselves into ladies favours, they do
always reason themselves out again. What! a
speaker is but a prater; a rhyme is but a ballad. A
good leg will fall; a straight back will stoop; a
black beard will turn white; a curled pate will grow
bald; a fair face will wither; a full eye will wax
hollow: but a good heart, Kate, is the sun and the
moon; or, rather, the sun, and not the moon; for it
shines bright and never changes, but keeps his
course truly. If thou would have such a one, take
me; and take me, take a soldier; take a soldier,
take a king. And what sayest thou then to my love?
speak, my fair, and fairly, I pray thee.
Is it possible dat I sould love de enemy of France?
No; it is not possible you should love the enemy of
France, Kate: but, in loving me, you should love
the friend of France; for I love France so well that
I will not part with a village of it; I will have it
all mine: and, Kate, when France is mine and I am
yours, then yours is France and you are mine.
I cannot tell vat is dat.
No, Kate? I will tell thee in French; which I am
sure will hang upon my tongue like a new-married
wife about her husbands neck, hardly to be shook
off. Je quand sur le possession de France, et quand
vous avez le possession de moi,--let me see, what
then? Saint Denis be my speed!--donc votre est
France et vous etes mienne. It is as easy for me,
Kate, to conquer the kingdom as to speak so much
more French: I shall never move thee in French,
unless it be to laugh at me.
Sauf votre honneur, le Francois que vous parlez, il
est meilleur que lAnglois lequel je parle.
No, faith, ist not, Kate: but thy speaking of my
tongue, and I thine, most truly-falsely, must needs
be granted to be much at one. But, Kate, dost thou
understand thus much English, canst thou love me?
I cannot tell.
Can any of your neighbours tell, Kate? Ill ask
them. Come, I know thou lovest me: and at night,
when you come into your closet, youll question this
gentlewoman about me; and I know, Kate, you will to
her dispraise those parts in me that you love with
your heart: but, good Kate, mock me mercifully; the
rather, gentle princess, because I love thee
cruelly. If ever thou beest mine, Kate, as I have a
saving faith within me tells me thou shalt, I get
thee with scambling, and thou must therefore needs
prove a good soldier-breeder: shall not thou and I,
between Saint Denis and Saint George, compound a
boy, half French, half English, that shall go to
Constantinople and take the Turk by the beard?
shall we not? what sayest thou, my fair
flower-de-luce?
I do not know dat
No; tis hereafter to know, but now to promise: do
but now promise, Kate, you will endeavour for your
French part of such a boy; and for my English moiety
take the word of a king and a bachelor. How answer
you, la plus belle Katharine du monde, mon tres cher
et devin deesse?
Your majestee ave fausse French enough to deceive de
most sage demoiselle dat is en France.
Now, fie upon my false French! By mine honour, in
true English, I love thee, Kate: by which honour I
dare not swear thou lovest me; yet my blood begins to
flatter me that thou dost, notwithstanding the poor
and untempering effect of my visage. Now, beshrew
my fathers ambition! he was thinking of civil wars
when he got me: therefore was I created with a
stubborn outside, with an aspect of iron, that, when
I come to woo ladies, I fright them. But, in faith,
Kate, the elder I wax, the better I shall appear:
my comfort is, that old age, that ill layer up of
beauty, can do no more, spoil upon my face: thou
hast me, if thou hast me, at the worst; and thou
shalt wear me, if thou wear me, better and better:
and therefore tell me, most fair Katharine, will you
have me? Put off your maiden blushes; avouch the
thoughts of your heart with the looks of an empress;
take me by the hand, and say Harry of England I am
thine: which word thou shalt no sooner bless mine
ear withal, but I will tell thee aloud England is
thine, Ireland is thine, France is thine, and Harry
Plantagenet is thine; who though I speak it before
his face, if he be not fellow with the best king,
thou shalt find the best king of good fellows.
Come, your answer in broken music; for thy voice is
music and thy English broken; therefore, queen of
all, Katharine, break thy mind to me in broken
English; wilt thou have me?
Dat is as it sall please de roi mon pere.
Nay, it will please him well, Kate it shall please
him, Kate.
Den it sall also content me.
Upon that I kiss your hand, and I call you my queen.
Laissez, mon seigneur, laissez, laissez: ma foi, je
ne veux point que vous abaissiez votre grandeur en
baisant la main dune de votre seigeurie indigne
serviteur; excusez-moi, je vous supplie, mon
tres-puissant seigneur.
Then I will kiss your lips, Kate.
Les dames et demoiselles pour etre baisees devant
leur noces, il nest pas la coutume de France.
Madam my interpreter, what says she?
Dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies of
France,--I cannot tell vat is baiser en Anglish.
To kiss.
Your majesty entendre bettre que moi.
It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss
before they are married, would she say?
Oui, vraiment.
O Kate, nice customs curtsy to great kings. Dear
Kate, you and I cannot be confined within the weak
list of a countrys fashion: we are the makers of
manners, Kate; and the liberty that follows our
places stops the mouth of all find-faults; as I will
do yours, for upholding the nice fashion of your
country in denying me a kiss: therefore, patiently
and yielding.
Kissing her
You have witchcraft in your lips, Kate: there is
more eloquence in a sugar touch of them than in the
tongues of the French council; and they should
sooner persuade Harry of England than a general
petition of monarchs. Here comes your father.
Re-enter the FRENCH KING and his QUEEN, BURGUNDY, and other Lords
God save your majesty! my royal cousin, teach you
our princess English?
I would have her learn, my fair cousin, how
perfectly I love her; and that is good English.
Is she not apt?
Our tongue is rough, coz, and my condition is not
smooth; so that, having neither the voice nor the
heart of flattery about me, I cannot so conjure up
the spirit of love in her, that he will appear in
his true likeness.
Pardon the frankness of my mirth, if I answer you
for that. If you would conjure in her, you must
make a circle; if conjure up love in her in his true
likeness, he must appear naked and blind. Can you
blame her then, being a maid yet rosed over with the
virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the
appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing
self? It were, my lord, a hard condition for a maid
to consign to.
Yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.
They are then excused, my lord, when they see not
what they do.
Then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.
I will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will
teach her to know my meaning: for maids, well
summered and warm kept, are like flies at
Bartholomew-tide, blind, though they have their
eyes; and then they will endure handling, which
before would not abide looking on.
This moral ties me over to time and a hot summer;
and so I shall catch the fly, your cousin, in the
latter end and she must be blind too.
As love is, my lord, before it loves.
It is so: and you may, some of you, thank love for
my blindness, who cannot see many a fair French city
for one fair French maid that stands in my way.
Yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities
