turned into a maid; for they are all girdled with
maiden walls that war hath never entered.
Shall Kate be my wife?
So please you.
I am content; so the maiden cities you talk of may
wait on her: so the maid that stood in the way for
my wish shall show me the way to my will.
We have consented to all terms of reason.
Ist so, my lords of England?
The king hath granted every article:
His daughter first, and then in sequel all,
According to their firm proposed natures.
Only he hath not yet subscribed this:
Where your majesty demands, that the King of France,
having any occasion to write for matter of grant,
shall name your highness in this form and with this
addition in French, Notre trescher fils Henri, Roi
dAngleterre, Heritier de France; and thus in
Latin, Praeclarissimus filius noster Henricus, Rex
Angliae, et Haeres Franciae.
Nor this I have not, brother, so denied,
But your request shall make me let it pass.
I pray you then, in love and dear alliance,
Let that one article rank with the rest;
And thereupon give me your daughter.
Take her, fair son, and from her blood raise up
Issue to me; that the contending kingdoms
Of France and England, whose very shores look pale
With envy of each others happiness,
May cease their hatred, and this dear conjunction
Plant neighbourhood and Christian-like accord
In their sweet bosoms, that never war advance
His bleeding sword twixt England and fair France.
Amen!
Now, welcome, Kate: and bear me witness all,
That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen.
Flourish
God, the best maker of all marriages,
Combine your hearts in one, your realms in one!
As man and wife, being two, are one in love,
So be there twixt your kingdoms such a spousal,
That never may ill office, or fell jealousy,
Which troubles oft the bed of blessed marriage,
Thrust in between the paction of these kingdoms,
To make divorce of their incorporate league;
That English may as French, French Englishmen,
Receive each other. God speak this Amen!
Amen!
Prepare we for our marriage--on which day,
My Lord of Burgundy, well take your oath,
And all the peers, for surety of our leagues.
Then shall I swear to Kate, and you to me;
And may our oaths well kept and prosperous be!
Sennet. Exeunt
EPILOGUE
Enter Chorus
Thus far, with rough and all-unable pen,
Our bending author hath pursued the story,
In little room confining mighty men,
Mangling by starts the full course of their glory.
Small time, but in that small most greatly lived
This star of England: Fortune made his sword;
By which the worlds best garden be achieved,
And of it left his son imperial lord.
Henry the Sixth, in infant bands crownd King
Of France and England, did this king succeed;
Whose state so many had the managing,
That they lost France and made his England bleed:
Which oft our stage hath shown; and, for their sake,
In your fair minds let this acceptance take.
Exit
ACT I
PROLOGUE
I come no more to make you laugh: things now,
That bear a weighty and a serious brow,
Sad, high, and working, full of state and woe,
Such noble scenes as draw the eye to flow,
We now present. Those that can pity, here
May, if they think it well, let fall a tear;
The subject will deserve it. Such as give
Their money out of hope they may believe,
May here find truth too. Those that come to see
Only a show or two, and so agree
The play may pass, if they be still and willing,
Ill undertake may see away their shilling
Richly in two short hours. Only they
That come to hear a merry bawdy play,
A noise of targets, or to see a fellow
In a long motley coat guarded with yellow,
Will be deceived; for, gentle hearers, know,
To rank our chosen truth with such a show
As fool and fight is, beside forfeiting
Our own brains, and the opinion that we bring,
To make that only true we now intend,
Will leave us never an understanding friend.
Therefore, for goodness sake, and as you are known
The first and happiest hearers of the town,
Be sad, as we would make ye: think ye see
The very persons of our noble story
As they were living; think you see them great,
And followd with the general throng and sweat
Of thousand friends; then in a moment, see
How soon this mightiness meets misery:
And, if you can be merry then, Ill say
A man may weep upon his wedding-day.
SCENE I. London. An ante-chamber in the palace.
Enter NORFOLK at one door; at the other, BUCKINGHAM and ABERGAVENNY
Good morrow, and well met. How have ye done
Since last we saw in France?
I thank your grace,
Healthful; and ever since a fresh admirer
Of what I saw there.
An untimely ague
Stayd me a prisoner in my chamber when
Those suns of glory, those two lights of men,
Met in the vale of Andren.
Twixt Guynes and Arde:
I was then present, saw them salute on horseback;
Beheld them, when they lighted, how they clung
In their embracement, as they grew together;
Which had they, what four throned ones could have weighd
Such a compounded one?
All the whole time
I was my chambers prisoner.
Then you lost
The view of earthly glory: men might say,
Till this time pomp was single, but now married
To one above itself. Each following day
Became the next days master, till the last
Made former wonders its. To-day the French,
All clinquant, all in gold, like heathen gods,
Shone down the English; and, to-morrow, they
Made Britain India: every man that stood
Showd like a mine. Their dwarfish pages were
As cherubins, all guilt: the madams too,
Not used to toil, did almost sweat to bear
The pride upon them, that their very labour
Was to them as a painting: now this masque
Was cried incomparable; and the ensuing night
Made it a fool and beggar. The two kings,
Equal in lustre, were now best, now worst,
As presence did present them; him in eye,
Still him in praise: and, being present both
Twas said they saw but one; and no discerner
Durst wag his tongue in censure. When these suns--
For so they phrase em--by their heralds challenged
The noble spirits to arms, they did perform
Beyond thoughts compass; that former fabulous story,
Being now seen possible enough, got credit,
That Bevis was believed.
O, you go far.
As I belong to worship and affect
In honour honesty, the tract of every thing
Would by a good discourser lose some life,
Which actions self was tongue to. All was royal;
To the disposing of it nought rebelld.
Order gave each thing view; the office did
Distinctly his full function.
Who did guide,
I mean, who set the body and the limbs
Of this great sport together, as you guess?
One, certes, that promises no element
In such a business.
I pray you, who, my lord?
All this was orderd by the good discretion
Of the right reverend Cardinal of York.
The devil speed him! no mans pie is freed
From his ambitious finger. What had he
To do in these fierce vanities? I wonder
That such a keech can with his very bulk
Take up the rays o the beneficial sun
And keep it from the earth.
Surely, sir,
Theres in him stuff that puts him to these ends;
For, being not proppd by ancestry, whose grace
Chalks successors their way, nor calld upon
For high feats done to the crown; neither allied
For eminent assistants; but, spider-like,
Out of his self-drawing web, he gives us note,
The force of his own merit makes his way
A gift that heaven gives for him, which buys
A place next to the king.
I cannot tell
What heaven hath given him,--let some graver eye
Pierce into that; but I can see his pride
Peep through each part of him: whence has he that,
If not from hell? the devil is a niggard,
Or has given all before, and he begins
A new hell in himself.
Why the devil,
Upon this French going out, took he upon him,
Without the privity o the king, to appoint
Who should attend on him? He makes up the file
Of all the gentry; for the most part such
To whom as great a charge as little honour
He meant to lay upon: and his own letter,
The honourable board of council out,
Must fetch him in the papers.
I do know
Kinsmen of mine, three at the least, that have
By this so sickened their estates, that never
They shall abound as formerly.
O, many
Have broke their backs with laying manors on em
For this great journey. What did this vanity
But minister communication of
A most poor issue?
Grievingly I think,
The peace between the French and us not values
The cost that did conclude it.
Every man,
After the hideous storm that followd, was
A thing inspired; and, not consulting, broke
Into a general prophecy; That this tempest,
Dashing the garment of this peace, aboded
The sudden breach ont.
Which is budded out;
For France hath flawd the league, and hath attachd
Our merchants goods at Bourdeaux.
Is it therefore
The ambassador is silenced?
Marry, ist.
A proper title of a peace; and purchased
At a superfluous rate!
Why, all this business
Our reverend cardinal carried.
Like it your grace,
The state takes notice of the private difference
Betwixt you and the cardinal. I advise you--
And take it from a heart that wishes towards you
Honour and plenteous safety--that you read
The cardinals malice and his potency
Together; to consider further that
What his high hatred would effect wants not
A minister in his power. You know his nature,
That hes revengeful, and I know his sword
Hath a sharp edge: its long and, t may be said,
It reaches far, and where twill not extend,
Thither he darts it. Bosom up my counsel,
Youll find it wholesome. Lo, where comes that rock
That I advise your shunning.
Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, the purse borne before him,  certain of the Guard, and two Secretaries with  papers. CARDINAL WOLSEY in his passage fixeth his  eye on BUCKINGHAM, and BUCKINGHAM on him, both full of disdain
The Duke of Buckinghams surveyor, ha?
Wheres his examination?
Here, so please you.
Is he in person ready?
Ay, please your grace.
Well, we shall then know more; and Buckingham
Shall lessen this big look.
Exeunt CARDINAL WOLSEY and his Train
This butchers cur is venom-mouthd, and I
Have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best
Not wake him in his slumber. A beggars book
Outworths a nobles blood.
What, are you chafed?
Ask God for temperance; thats the appliance only
Which your disease requires.
I read ins looks
Matter against me; and his eye reviled
Me, as his abject object: at this instant
He bores me with some trick: hes gone to the king;
Ill follow and outstare him.
Stay, my lord,
And let your reason with your choler question
What tis you go about: to climb steep hills
Requires slow pace at first: anger is like
A full-hot horse, who being allowd his way,
Self-mettle tires him. Not a man in England
Can advise me like you: be to yourself
As you would to your friend.
Ill to the king;
And from a mouth of honour quite cry down
This Ipswich fellows insolence; or proclaim
Theres difference in no persons.
Be advised;
Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot
That it do singe yourself: we may outrun,
By violent swiftness, that which we run at,
And lose by over-running. Know you not,
The fire that mounts the liquor til run oer,
In seeming to augment it wastes it? Be advised:
I say again, there is no English soul
More stronger to direct you than yourself,
If with the sap of reason you would quench,
Or but allay, the fire of passion.
Sir,
I am thankful to you; and Ill go along
By your prescription: but this top-proud fellow,
Whom from the flow of gall I name not but
From sincere motions, by intelligence,
And proofs as clear as founts in July when
We see each grain of gravel, I do know
To be corrupt and treasonous.
Say not treasonous.
To the king Ill sayt; and make my vouch as strong
As shore of rock. Attend. This holy fox,
Or wolf, or both,--for he is equal ravenous
As he is subtle, and as prone to mischief
As able to performt; his mind and place
Infecting one another, yea, reciprocally--
Only to show his pomp as well in France
As here at home, suggests the king our master
To this last costly treaty, the interview,
That swallowd so much treasure, and like a glass
Did break i the rinsing.
Faith, and so it did.
Pray, give me favour, sir. This cunning cardinal
The articles o the combination drew
As himself pleased; and they were ratified
As he cried Thus let be: to as much end
As give a crutch to the dead: but our count-cardinal
Has done this, and tis well; for worthy Wolsey,
Who cannot err, he did it. Now this follows,--
Which, as I take it, is a kind of puppy
To the old dam, treason,--Charles the emperor,
Under pretence to see the queen his aunt--
For twas indeed his colour, but he came
To whisper Wolsey,--here makes visitation:
His fears were, that the interview betwixt
England and France might, through their amity,
Breed him some prejudice; for from this league
Peepd harms that menaced him: he privily
Deals with our cardinal; and, as I trow,--
Which I do well; for I am sure the emperor
Paid ere he promised; whereby his suit was granted
Ere it was askd; but when the way was made,
And paved with gold, the emperor thus desired,
That he would please to alter the kings course,
And break the foresaid peace. Let the king know,
As soon he shall by me, that thus the cardinal
Does buy and sell his honour as he pleases,
And for his own advantage.
I am sorry
To hear this of him; and could wish he were
Something mistaken int.
No, not a syllable:
I  do pronounce him in that very shape
He shall appear in proof.
Enter BRANDON, a Sergeant-at-arms before him, and two or three of the Guard
Your office, sergeant; execute it.
Sir,
My lord the Duke of Buckingham, and Earl
Of Hereford, Stafford, and Northampton, I
Arrest thee of high treason, in the name
Of our most sovereign king.
Lo, you, my lord,
The net has falln upon me! I shall perish
Under device and practise.
I am sorry
To see you taen from liberty, to look on
The business present: tis his highness pleasure
You shall to the Tower.
It will help me nothing
To plead mine innocence; for that dye is on me
Which makes my whitest part black. The will of heaven
Be done in this and all things! I obey.
O my Lord Abergavenny, fare you well!
Nay, he must bear you company. The king
To ABERGAVENNY
Is pleased you shall to the Tower, till you know
How he determines further.
As the duke said,
The will of heaven be done, and the kings pleasure
By me obeyd!
Here is a warrant from
The king to attach Lord Montacute; and the bodies
Of the dukes confessor, John de la Car,
One Gilbert Peck, his chancellor--
So, so;
These are the limbs o the plot: no more, I hope.
A monk o the Chartreux.
O, Nicholas Hopkins?
He.
My surveyor is false; the oer-great cardinal
Hath showd him gold; my life is spannd already:
I am the shadow of poor Buckingham,
Whose figure even this instant cloud puts on,
By darkening my clear sun. My lord, farewell.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. The council-chamber.
Cornets. Enter KING HENRY VIII, leaning on  CARDINAL WOLSEYs shoulder, the Nobles, and LOVELL;  CARDINAL WOLSEY places himself under KING HENRY VIIIs feet on his right side
My life itself, and the best heart of it,
Thanks you for this great care: I stood i the level
Of a full-charged confederacy, and give thanks
To you that choked it. Let be calld before us
That gentleman of Buckinghams; in person
Ill hear him his confessions justify;
And point by point the treasons of his master
He shall again relate.
A noise within, crying Room for the Queen! Enter  QUEEN KATHARINE, ushered by NORFOLK, and SUFFOLK:  she kneels. KING HENRY VIII riseth from his state, takes her up, kisses and placeth her by him
Nay, we must longer kneel: I am a suitor.
Arise, and take place by us: half your suit
Never name to us; you have half our power:
The other moiety, ere you ask, is given;
Repeat your will and take it.
Thank your majesty.
That you would love yourself, and in that love
Not unconsiderd leave your honour, nor
The dignity of your office, is the point
Of my petition.
Lady mine, proceed.
I am solicited, not by a few,
And those of true condition, that your subjects
Are in great grievance: there have been commissions
Sent down among em, which hath flawd the heart
Of all their loyalties: wherein, although,
My good lord cardinal, they vent reproaches
Most bitterly on you, as putter on
Of these exactions, yet the king our master--
Whose honour heaven shield from soil!--even he
escapes not
Language unmannerly, yea, such which breaks
The sides of loyalty, and almost appears
In loud rebellion.
Not almost appears,
It doth appear; for, upon these taxations,
The clothiers all, not able to maintain
The many to them longing, have put off
The spinsters, carders, fullers, weavers, who,
Unfit for other life, compelld by hunger
And lack of other means, in desperate manner
Daring the event to the teeth, are all in uproar,
And danger serves among then!
Taxation!
Wherein? and what taxation? My lord cardinal,
You that are blamed for it alike with us,
Know you of this taxation?
Please you, sir,
I know but of a single part, in aught
Pertains to the state; and front but in that file
Where others tell steps with me.
No, my lord,
You know no more than others; but you frame
Things that are known alike; which are not wholesome
To those which would not know them, and yet must
Perforce be their acquaintance. These exactions,
Whereof my sovereign would have note, they are
Most pestilent to the bearing; and, to bear em,
The back is sacrifice to the load. They say
They are devised by you; or else you suffer
Too hard an exclamation.
Still exaction!
The nature of it? in what kind, lets know,
Is this exaction?
I am much too venturous
In tempting of your patience; but am boldend
Under your promised pardon. The subjects grief
Comes through commissions, which compel from each
The sixth part of his substance, to be levied
Without delay; and the pretence for this
Is named, your wars in France: this makes bold mouths:
Tongues spit their duties out, and cold hearts freeze
Allegiance in them; their curses now
Live where their prayers did: and its come to pass,
This tractable obedience is a slave
To each incensed will. I would your highness
Would give it quick consideration, for
There is no primer business.
By my life,
This is against our pleasure.
And for me,
I have no further gone in this than by
A single voice; and that not passd me but
By learned approbation of the judges. If I am
Traduced by ignorant tongues, which neither know
My faculties nor person, yet will be
The chronicles of my doing, let me say
Tis but the fate of place, and the rough brake
That virtue must go through. We must not stint
Our necessary actions, in the fear
To cope malicious censurers; which ever,
As ravenous fishes, do a vessel follow
That is new-trimmd, but benefit no further
Than vainly longing. What we oft do best,
By sick interpreters, once weak ones, is
Not ours, or not allowd; what worst, as oft,
Hitting a grosser quality, is cried up
For our best act. If we shall stand still,
In fear our motion will be mockd or carpd at,
We should take root here where we sit, or sit
State-statues only.
Things done well,
And with a care, exempt themselves from fear;
Things done without example, in their issue
Are to be feard. Have you a precedent
Of this commission? I believe, not any.
We must not rend our subjects from our laws,
And stick them in our will. Sixth part of each?
A trembling contribution! Why, we take
From every tree lop, bark, and part o the timber;
And, though we leave it with a root, thus hackd,
The air will drink the sap. To every county
Where this is questiond send our letters, with
Free pardon to each man that has denied
The force of this commission: pray, look tot;
I put it to your care.
A word with you.
To the Secretary
Let there be letters writ to every shire,
Of the kings grace and pardon. The grieved commons
Hardly conceive of me; let it be noised
That through our intercession this revokement
And pardon comes: I shall anon advise you
Further in the proceeding.
Exit Secretary
Enter Surveyor
I am sorry that the Duke of Buckingham
Is run in your displeasure.
It grieves many:
The gentleman is learnd, and a most rare speaker;
To nature none more bound; his training such,
That he may furnish and instruct great teachers,
And never seek for aid out of himself. Yet see,
When these so noble benefits shall prove
Not well disposed, the mind growing once corrupt,
They turn to vicious forms, ten times more ugly
Than ever they were fair. This man so complete,
Who was enrolld mongst wonders, and when we,
Almost with ravishd listening, could not find
His hour of speech a minute; he, my lady,
Hath into monstrous habits put the graces
That once were his, and is become as black
As if besmeard in hell. Sit by us; you shall hear--
This was his gentleman in trust--of him
Things to strike honour sad. Bid him recount
The fore-recited practises; whereof
We cannot feel too little, hear too much.
Stand forth, and with bold spirit relate what you,
Most like a careful subject, have collected
Out of the Duke of Buckingham.
Speak freely.
First, it was usual with him, every day
It would infect his speech, that if the king
Should without issue die, hell carry it so
To make the sceptre his: these very words
Ive heard him utter to his son-in-law,
Lord Abergavenny; to whom by oath he menaced
Revenge upon the cardinal.
Please your highness, note
This dangerous conception in this point.
Not friended by by his wish, to your high person
His will is most malignant; and it stretches
Beyond you, to your friends.
My learnd lord cardinal,
Deliver all with charity.
Speak on:
How grounded he his title to the crown,
Upon our fail? to this point hast thou heard him
At any time speak aught?
He was brought to this
By a vain prophecy of Nicholas Hopkins.
What was that Hopkins?
Sir, a Chartreux friar,
His confessor, who fed him every minute
With words of sovereignty.
How knowst thou this?
Not long before your highness sped to France,
The duke being at the Rose, within the parish
Saint Lawrence Poultney, did of me demand
What was the speech among the Londoners
Concerning the French journey: I replied,
Men feard the French would prove perfidious,
To the kings danger. Presently the duke
Said, twas the fear, indeed; and that he doubted
Twould prove the verity of certain words
Spoke by a holy monk; that oft, says he,
Hath sent to me, wishing me to permit
John de la Car, my chaplain, a choice hour
To hear from him a matter of some moment:
Whom after under the confessions seal
He solemnly had sworn, that what he spoke
My chaplain to no creature living, but
To me, should utter, with demure confidence
This pausingly ensued: neither the king nors heirs,
Tell you the duke, shall prosper: bid him strive
To gain the love o the commonalty: the duke
Shall govern England.
If I know you well,
You were the dukes surveyor, and lost your office
On the complaint o the tenants: take good heed
You charge not in your spleen a noble person
And spoil your nobler soul: I say, take heed;
Yes, heartily beseech you.
Let him on.
Go forward.
On my soul, Ill speak but truth.
I told my lord the duke, by the devils illusions
The monk might be deceived; and that twas dangerous for him
To ruminate on this so far, until
It forged him some design, which, being believed,
It was much like to do: he answerd, Tush,
It can do me no damage; adding further,
That, had the king in his last sickness faild,
The cardinals and Sir Thomas Lovells heads
Should have gone off.
Ha! what, so rank? Ah ha!
Theres mischief in this man: canst thou say further?
I can, my liege.
Proceed.
Being at Greenwich,
After your highness had reproved the duke
About Sir William Blomer,--
I remember
Of such a time: being my sworn servant,
The duke retaind him his. But on; what hence?
If, quoth he, I for this had been committed,
As, to the Tower, I thought, I would have playd
The part my father meant to act upon
The usurper Richard; who, being at Salisbury,
Made suit to come ins presence; which if granted,
As he made semblance of his duty, would
Have put his knife to him.
A giant traitor!
Now, madam, may his highness live in freedom,
and this man out of prison?
God mend all!
Theres something more would out of thee; what sayst?
After the duke his father, with the knife,
He stretchd him, and, with one hand on his dagger,
Another spread ons breast, mounting his eyes
He did discharge a horrible oath; whose tenor
Was,--were he evil used, he would outgo
His father by as much as a performance
Does an irresolute purpose.
Theres his period,
To sheathe his knife in us. He is attachd;
Call him to present trial: if he may
Find mercy in the law, tis his: if none,
Let him not seek t of us: by day and night,
Hes traitor to the height.
Exeunt
SCENE III. An ante-chamber in the palace.
Enter Chamberlain and SANDS
Ist possible the spells of France should juggle
Men into such strange mysteries?
New customs,
Though they be never so ridiculous,
Nay, let em be unmanly, yet are followd.
As far as I see, all the good our English
Have got by the late voyage is but merely
A fit or two o the face; but they are shrewd ones;
For when they hold em, you would swear directly
Their very noses had been counsellors
To Pepin or Clotharius, they keep state so.
They have all new legs, and lame ones: one would take it,
That never saw em pace before, the spavin
Or springhalt reignd among em.
Death! my lord,
Their clothes are after such a pagan cut too,
That, sure, theyve worn out Christendom.
Enter LOVELL
How now!
What news, Sir Thomas Lovell?
Faith, my lord,
I hear of none, but the new proclamation
Thats clappd upon the court-gate.
What ist for?
The reformation of our travelld gallants,
That fill the court with quarrels, talk, and tailors.
Im glad tis there: now I would pray our monsieurs
To think an English courtier may be wise,
And never see the Louvre.
They must either,
For so run the conditions, leave those remnants
Of fool and feather that they got in France,
With all their honourable point of ignorance
Pertaining thereunto, as fights and fireworks,
Abusing better men than they can be,
Out of a foreign wisdom, renouncing clean
The faith they have in tennis, and tall stockings,
Short blisterd breeches, and those types of travel,
And understand again like honest men;
Or pack to their old playfellows: there, I take it,
They may, cum privilegio, wear away
The lag end of their lewdness and be laughd at.
Tis time to give em physic, their diseases
Are grown so catching.
What a loss our ladies
Will have of these trim vanities!
Ay, marry,
There will be woe indeed, lords: the sly whoresons
Have got a speeding trick to lay down ladies;
A French song and a fiddle has no fellow.
The devil fiddle em! I am glad they are going,
For, sure, theres no converting of em: now
An honest country lord, as I am, beaten
A long time out of play, may bring his plainsong
And have an hour of hearing; and, byr lady,
Held current music too.
Well said, Lord Sands;
Your colts tooth is not cast yet.
No, my lord;
Nor shall not, while I have a stump.
Sir Thomas,
Whither were you a-going?
To the cardinals:
Your lordship is a guest too.
O, tis true:
This night he makes a supper, and a great one,
To many lords and ladies; there will be
The beauty of this kingdom, Ill assure you.
That churchman bears a bounteous mind indeed,
A hand as fruitful as the land that feeds us;
His dews fall every where.
No doubt hes noble;
He had a black mouth that said other of him.
He may, my lord; has wherewithal: in him
Sparing would show a worse sin than ill doctrine:
Men of his way should be most liberal;
They are set here for examples.
True, they are so:
But few now give so great ones. My barge stays;
Your lordship shall along. Come, good Sir Thomas,
We shall be late else; which I would not be,
For I was spoke to, with Sir Henry Guildford
This night to be comptrollers.
I am your lordships.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. A Hall in York Place.
Hautboys. A small table under a state for CARDINAL  WOLSEY, a longer table for the guests. Then enter  ANNE and divers other Ladies and Gentlemen as  guests, at one door; at another door, enter GUILDFORD
Ladies, a general welcome from his grace
Salutes ye all; this night he dedicates
To fair content and you: none here, he hopes,
In all this noble bevy, has brought with her
One care abroad; he would have all as merry
As, first, good company, good wine, good welcome,
Can make good people. O, my lord, youre tardy:
Enter Chamberlain, SANDS, and LOVELL
The very thought of this fair company
Clappd wings to me.
You are young, Sir Harry Guildford.
Sir Thomas Lovell, had the cardinal
But half my lay thoughts in him, some of these
Should find a running banquet ere they rested,
I think would better please em: by my life,
They are a sweet society of fair ones.
O, that your lordship were but now confessor
To one or two of these!
I would I were;
They should find easy penance.
Faith, how easy?
As easy as a down-bed would afford it.
Sweet ladies, will it please you sit? Sir Harry,
Place you that side; Ill take the charge of this:
His grace is entering. Nay, you must not freeze;
Two women placed together makes cold weather:
My Lord Sands, you are one will keep em waking;
Pray, sit between these ladies.
By my faith,
And thank your lordship. By your leave, sweet ladies:
If I chance to talk a little wild, forgive me;
I had it from my father.
Was he mad, sir?
O, very mad, exceeding mad, in love too:
But he would bite none; just as I do now,
He would kiss you twenty with a breath.
Kisses her
Well said, my lord.
So, now youre fairly seated. Gentlemen,
The penance lies on you, if these fair ladies
Pass away frowning.
For my little cure,
Let me alone.
Hautboys. Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, and takes his state
Youre welcome, my fair guests: that noble lady,
Or gentleman, that is not freely merry,
Is not my friend: this, to confirm my welcome;
And to you all, good health.
Drinks
Your grace is noble:
Let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks,
And save me so much talking.
My Lord Sands,
I am beholding to you: cheer your neighbours.
Ladies, you are not merry: gentlemen,
Whose fault is this?
The red wine first must rise
In their fair cheeks, my lord; then we shall have em
Talk us to silence.
You are a merry gamester,
My Lord Sands.
Yes, if I make my play.
Heres to your ladyship: and pledge it, madam,
For tis to such a thing,--
You cannot show me.
I told your grace they would talk anon.
Drum and trumpet, chambers discharged
Whats that?
Look out there, some of ye.
Exit Servant
What warlike voice,
And to what end is this? Nay, ladies, fear not;
By all the laws of war youre privileged.
Re-enter Servant
How now! what ist?
A noble troop of strangers;
For so they seem: theyve left their barge and landed;
And hither make, as great ambassadors
From foreign princes.
Good lord chamberlain,
Go, give em welcome; you can speak the French tongue;
And, pray, receive em nobly, and conduct em
Into our presence, where this heaven of beauty
Shall shine at full upon them. Some attend him.
Exit Chamberlain, attended. All rise, and tables removed
You have now a broken banquet; but well mend it.
A good digestion to you all: and once more
I shower a welcome on ye; welcome all.
Hautboys. Enter KING HENRY VIII and others, as  masquers, habited like shepherds, ushered by the  Chamberlain. They pass directly before CARDINAL WOLSEY, and gracefully salute him
A noble company! what are their pleasures?
Because they speak no English, thus they prayd
To tell your grace, that, having heard by fame
Of this so noble and so fair assembly
This night to meet here, they could do no less
Out of the great respect they bear to beauty,
But leave their flocks; and, under your fair conduct,
Crave leave to view these ladies and entreat
An hour of revels with em.
Say, lord chamberlain,
They have done my poor house grace; for which I pay em
A thousand thanks, and pray em take their pleasures.
They choose Ladies for the dance. KING HENRY VIII chooses ANNE
The fairest hand I ever touchd! O beauty,
Till now I never knew thee!
Music. Dance
My lord!
Your grace?
Pray, tell em thus much from me:
There should be one amongst em, by his person,
More worthy this place than myself; to whom,
If I but knew him, with my love and duty
I would surrender it.
I will, my lord.
Whispers the Masquers
What say they?
Such a one, they all confess,
There is indeed; which they would have your grace
Find out, and he will take it.
Let me see, then.
By all your good leaves, gentlemen; here Ill make
My royal choice.
Ye have found him, cardinal:
Unmasking
You hold a fair assembly; you do well, lord:
You are a churchman, or, Ill tell you, cardinal,
I should judge now unhappily.
I am glad
Your grace is grown so pleasant.
My lord chamberlain,
Prithee, come hither: what fair ladys that?
Ant please your grace, Sir Thomas Bullens daughter--
The Viscount Rochford,--one of her highness women.
By heaven, she is a dainty one. Sweetheart,
I were unmannerly, to take you out,
And not to kiss you. A health, gentlemen!
Let it go round.
Sir Thomas Lovell, is the banquet ready
I the privy chamber?
Yes, my lord.
Your grace,
I fear, with dancing is a little heated.
I fear, too much.
Theres fresher air, my lord,
In the next chamber.
Lead in your ladies, every one: sweet partner,
I must not yet forsake you: lets be merry:
Good my lord cardinal, I have half a dozen healths
To drink to these fair ladies, and a measure
To lead em once again; and then lets dream
Whos best in favour. Let the music knock it.
Exeunt with trumpets
ACT II
SCENE I. Westminster. A street.
Enter two Gentlemen, meeting
Whither away so fast?
O, God save ye!
Even to the hall, to hear what shall become
Of the great Duke of Buckingham.
Ill save you
That labour, sir. Alls now done, but the ceremony
Of bringing back the prisoner.
Were you there?
Yes, indeed, was I.
Pray, speak what has happend.
You may guess quickly what.
Is he found guilty?
Yes, truly is he, and condemnd upont.
I am sorry fort.
So are a number more.
But, pray, how passd it?
Ill tell you in a little. The great duke
Came to the bar; where to his accusations
He pleaded still not guilty and alleged
Many sharp reasons to defeat the law.
The kings attorney on the contrary
Urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions
Of divers witnesses; which the duke desired
To have brought viva voce to his face:
At which appeard against him his surveyor;
Sir Gilbert Peck his chancellor; and John Car,
Confessor to him; with that devil-monk,
Hopkins, that made this mischief.
That was he
That fed him with his prophecies?
The same.
All these accused him strongly; which he fain
Would have flung from him, but, indeed, he could not:
And so his peers, upon this evidence,
Have found him guilty of high treason. Much
He spoke, and learnedly, for life; but all
Was either pitied in him or forgotten.
After all this, how did he bear himself?
When he was brought again to the bar, to hear
His knell rung out, his judgment, he was stirrd
With such an agony, he sweat extremely,
And something spoke in choler, ill, and hasty:
But he fell to himself again, and sweetly
In all the rest showd a most noble patience.
I do not think he fears death.
Sure, he does not:
He never was so womanish; the cause
He may a little grieve at.
Certainly
The cardinal is the end of this.
Tis likely,
By all conjectures: first, Kildares attainder,
Then deputy of Ireland; who removed,
Earl Surrey was sent thither, and in haste too,
Lest he should help his father.
That trick of state
Was a deep envious one.
At his return
No doubt he will requite it. This is noted,
And generally, whoever the king favours,
The cardinal instantly will find employment,
And far enough from court too.
All the commons
Hate him perniciously, and, o my conscience,
Wish him ten fathom deep: this duke as much
They love and dote on; call him bounteous Buckingham,
The mirror of all courtesy;--
Stay there, sir,
And see the noble ruind man you speak of.
Enter BUCKINGHAM from his arraignment; tip-staves  before him; the axe with the edge towards him;  halberds on each side: accompanied with LOVELL, VAUX, SANDS, and common people
Lets stand close, and behold him.
All good people,
You that thus far have come to pity me,
Hear what I say, and then go home and lose me.
I have this day received a traitors judgment,
And by that name must die: yet, heaven bear witness,
And if I have a co nscience, let it sink me,
Even as the axe falls, if I be not faithful!
The law I bear no malice for my death;
T has done, upon the premises, but justice:
But those that sought it I could wish more Christians:
Be what they will, I heartily forgive em:
Yet let em look they glory not in mischief,
Nor build their evils on the graves of great men;
For then my guiltless blood must cry against em.
For further life in this world I neer hope,
Nor will I sue, although the king have mercies
More than I dare make faults. You few that loved me,
And dare be bold to weep for Buckingham,
His noble friends and fellows, whom to leave
Is only bitter to him, only dying,
Go with me, like good angels, to my end;
And, as the long divorce of steel falls on me,
Make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice,
And lift my soul to heaven. Lead on, o Gods name.
I do beseech your grace, for charity,
If ever any malice in your heart
Were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.
Sir Thomas Lovell, I as free forgive you
As I would be forgiven: I forgive all;
There cannot be those numberless offences
Gainst me, that I cannot take peace with:
no black envy
Shall mark my grave. Commend me to his grace;
And if he speak of Buckingham, pray, tell him
You met him half in heaven: my vows and prayers
Yet are the kings; and, till my soul forsake,
Shall cry for blessings on him: may he live
Longer than I have time to tell his years!
Ever beloved and loving may his rule be!
And when old time shall lead him to his end,
Goodness and he fill up one monument!
To the water side I must conduct your grace;
Then give my charge up to Sir Nicholas Vaux,
Who undertakes you to your end.
Prepare there,
The duke is coming: see the barge be ready;
And fit it with such furniture as suits
The greatness of his person.
Nay, Sir Nicholas,
Let it alone; my state now will but mock me.
When I came hither, I was lord high constable
And Duke of Buckingham; now, poor Edward Bohun:
Yet I am richer than my base accusers,
That never knew what truth meant: I now seal it;
And with that blood will make em one day groan fort.
