My noble father, Henry of Buckingham,
Who first raised head against usurping Richard,
Flying for succor to his servant Banister,
Being distressd, was by that wretch betrayd,
And without trial fell; Gods peace be with him!
Henry the Seventh succeeding, truly pitying
My fathers loss, like a most royal prince,
Restored me to my honours, and, out of ruins,
Made my name once more noble. Now his son,
Henry the Eighth, life, honour, name and all
That made me happy at one stroke has taken
For ever from the world. I had my trial,
And, must needs say, a noble one; which makes me,
A little happier than my wretched father:
Yet thus far we are one in fortunes: both
Fell by our servants, by those men we loved most;
A most unnatural and faithless service!
Heaven has an end in all: yet, you that hear me,
This from a dying man receive as certain:
Where you are liberal of your loves and counsels
Be sure you be not loose; for those you make friends
And give your hearts to, when they once perceive
The least rub in your fortunes, fall away
Like water from ye, never found again
But where they mean to sink ye. All good people,
Pray for me! I must now forsake ye: the last hour
Of my long weary life is come upon me. Farewell:
And when you would say something that is sad,
Speak how I fell. I have done; and God forgive me!
Exeunt BUCKINGHAM and Train
O, this is full of pity! Sir, it calls,
I fear, too many curses on their beads
That were the authors.
If the duke be guiltless,
Tis full of woe: yet I can give you inkling
Of an ensuing evil, if it fall,
Greater than this.
Good angels keep it from us!
What may it be? You do not doubt my faith, sir?
This secret is so weighty, twill require
A strong faith to conceal it.
Let me have it;
I do not talk much.
I am confident,
You shall, sir: did you not of late days hear
A buzzing of a separation
Between the king and Katharine?
Yes, but it held not:
For when the king once heard it, out of anger
He sent command to the lord mayor straight
To stop the rumor, and allay those tongues
That durst disperse it.
But that slander, sir,
Is found a truth now: for it grows again
Fresher than eer it was; and held for certain
The king will venture at it. Either the cardinal,
Or some about him near, have, out of malice
To the good queen, possessd him with a scruple
That will undo her: to confirm this too,
Cardinal Campeius is arrived, and lately;
As all think, for this business.
Tis the cardinal;
And merely to revenge him on the emperor
For not bestowing on him, at his asking,
The archbishopric of Toledo, this is purposed.
I think you have hit the mark: but ist not cruel
That she should feel the smart of this? The cardinal
Will have his will, and she must fall.
Tis woful.
We are too open here to argue this;
Lets think in private more.
Exeunt
SCENE II. An ante-chamber in the palace.
Enter Chamberlain, reading a letter
My lord, the horses your lordship sent for, with
all the care I had, I saw well chosen, ridden, and
furnished. They were young and handsome, and of the
best breed in the north. When they were ready to
set out for London, a man of my lord cardinals, by
commission and main power, took em from me; with
this reason: His master would be served before a
subject, if not before the king; which stopped our
mouths, sir.
I fear he will indeed: well, let him have them:
He will have all, I think.
Enter, to Chamberlain, NORFOLK and SUFFOLK
Well met, my lord chamberlain.
Good day to both your graces.
How is the king employd?
I left him private,
Full of sad thoughts and troubles.
Whats the cause?
It seems the marriage with his brothers wife
Has crept too near his conscience.
No, his conscience
Has crept too near another lady.
Tis so:
This is the cardinals doing, the king-cardinal:
That blind priest, like the eldest son of fortune,
Turns what he list. The king will know him one day.
Pray God he do! hell never know himself else.
How holily he works in all his business!
And with what zeal! for, now he has crackd the league
Between us and the emperor, the queens great nephew,
He dives into the kings soul, and there scatters
Dangers, doubts, wringing of the conscience,
Fears, and despairs; and all these for his marriage:
And out of all these to restore the king,
He counsels a divorce; a loss of her
That, like a jewel, has hung twenty years
About his neck, yet never lost her lustre;
Of her that loves him with that excellence
That angels love good men with; even of her
That, when the greatest stroke of fortune falls,
Will bless the king: and is not this course pious?
Heaven keep me from such counsel! Tis most true
These news are every where; every tongue speaks em,
And every true heart weeps fort: all that dare
Look into these affairs see this main end,
The French kings sister. Heaven will one day open
The kings eyes, that so long have slept upon
This bold bad man.
And free us from his slavery.
We had need pray,
And heartily, for our deliverance;
Or this imperious man will work us all
From princes into pages: all mens honours
Lie like one lump before him, to be fashiond
Into what pitch he please.
For me, my lords,
I love him not, nor fear him; theres my creed:
As I am made without him, so Ill stand,
If the king please; his curses and his blessings
Touch me alike, theyre breath I not believe in.
I knew him, and I know him; so I leave him
To him that made him proud, the pope.
Lets in;
And with some other business put the king
From these sad thoughts, that work too much upon him:
My lord, youll bear us company?
Excuse me;
The king has sent me otherwhere: besides,
Youll find a most unfit time to disturb him:
Health to your lordships.
Thanks, my good lord chamberlain.
Exit Chamberlain; and KING HENRY VIII draws the curtain, and sits reading pensively
How sad he looks! sure, he is much afflicted.
Whos there, ha?
Pray God he be not angry.
Whos there, I say? How dare you thrust yourselves
Into my private meditations?
Who am I? ha?
A gracious king that pardons all offences
Malice neer meant: our breach of duty this way
Is business of estate; in which we come
To know your royal pleasure.
Ye are too bold:
Go to; Ill make ye know your times of business:
Is this an hour for temporal affairs, ha?
Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY and CARDINAL CAMPEIUS, with a commission
Whos there? my good lord cardinal? O my Wolsey,
The quiet of my wounded conscience;
Thou art a cure fit for a king.
To CARDINAL CAMPEIUS
Youre welcome,
Most learned reverend sir, into our kingdom:
Use us and it.
To CARDINAL WOLSEY
My good lord, have great care
I be not found a talker.
Sir, you cannot.
I would your grace would give us but an hour
Of private conference.
[To NORFOLK and SUFFOLK]
We are busy; go.
[Aside to SUFFOLK]
This priest has no pride in him?
[Aside to NORFOLK]             Not to speak of:
I would not be so sick though for his place:
But this cannot continue.
[Aside to SUFFOLK]      If it do,
Ill venture one have-at-him.
[Aside to NORFOLK]          I another.
Exeunt NORFOLK and SUFFOLK
Your grace has given a precedent of wisdom
Above all princes, in committing freely
Your scruple to the voice of Christendom:
Who can be angry now? what envy reach you?
The Spaniard, tied blood and favour to her,
Must now confess, if they have any goodness,
The trial just and noble. All the clerks,
I mean the learned ones, in Christian kingdoms
Have their free voices: Rome, the nurse of judgment,
Invited by your noble self, hath sent
One general tongue unto us, this good man,
This just and learned priest, Cardinal Campeius;
Whom once more I present unto your highness.
And once more in mine arms I bid him welcome,
And thank the holy conclave for their loves:
They have sent me such a man I would have wishd for.
Your grace must needs deserve all strangers loves,
You are so noble. To your highness hand
I tender my commission; by whose virtue,
The court of Rome commanding, you, my lord
Cardinal of York, are joind with me their servant
In the unpartial judging of this business.
Two equal men. The queen shall be acquainted
Forthwith for what you come. Wheres Gardiner?
I know your majesty has always loved her
So dear in heart, not to deny her that
A woman of less place might ask by law:
Scholars allowd freely to argue for her.
Ay, and the best she shall have; and my favour
To him that does best: God forbid else. Cardinal,
Prithee, call Gardiner to me, my new secretary:
I find him a fit fellow.
Exit CARDINAL WOLSEY
Re-enter CARDINAL WOLSEY, with GARDINER
[Aside to GARDINER]  Give me your hand much joy and
favour to you;
You are the kings now.
[Aside to CARDINAL WOLSEY]
But to be commanded
For ever by your grace, whose hand has raised me.
Come hither, Gardiner.
Walks and whispers
My Lord of York, was not one Doctor Pace
In this mans place before him?
Yes, he was.
Was he not held a learned man?
Yes, surely.
Believe me, theres an ill opinion spread then
Even of yourself, lord cardinal.
How! of me?
They will not stick to say you envied him,
And fearing he would rise, he was so virtuous,
Kept him a foreign man still; which so grieved him,
That he ran mad and died.
Heavens peace be with him!
Thats Christian care enough: for living murmurers
Theres places of rebuke. He was a fool;
For he would needs be virtuous: that good fellow,
If I command him, follows my appointment:
I will have none so near else. Learn this, brother,
We live not to be gripd by meaner persons.
Deliver this with modesty to the queen.
Exit GARDINER
The most convenient place that I can think of
For such receipt of learning is Black-Friars;
There ye shall meet about this weighty business.
My Wolsey, see it furnishd. O, my lord,
Would it not grieve an able man to leave
So sweet a bedfellow? But, conscience, conscience!
O, tis a tender place; and I must leave her.
Exeunt
SCENE III. An ante-chamber of the QUEENS apartments.
Enter ANNE and an Old Lady
Not for that neither: heres the pang that pinches:
His highness having lived so long with her, and she
So good a lady that no tongue could ever
Pronounce dishonour of her; by my life,
She never knew harm-doing: O, now, after
So many courses of the sun enthroned,
Still growing in a majesty and pomp, the which
To leave a thousand-fold more bitter than
Tis sweet at first to acquire,--after this process,
To give her the avaunt! it is a pity
Would move a monster.
Hearts of most hard temper
Melt and lament for her.
O, Gods will! much better
She neer had known pomp: thought be temporal,
Yet, if that quarrel, fortune, do divorce
It from the bearer, tis a sufferance panging
As soul and bodys severing.
Alas, poor lady!
Shes a stranger now again.
So much the more
Must pity drop upon her. Verily,
I swear, tis better to be lowly born,
And range with humble livers in content,
Than to be perkd up in a glistering grief,
And wear a golden sorrow.
Our content
Is our best having.
By my troth and maidenhead,
I would not be a queen.
Beshrew me, I would,
And venture maidenhead fort; and so would you,
For all this spice of your hypocrisy:
You, that have so fair parts of woman on you,
Have too a womans heart; which ever yet
Affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty;
Which, to say sooth, are blessings; and which gifts,
Saving your mincing, the capacity
Of your soft cheveril conscience would receive,
If you might please to stretch it.
Nay, good troth.
Yes, troth, and troth; you would not be a queen?
No, not for all the riches under heaven.
Old Lady:Tis strange: a three-pence bowd would hire me,
Old as I am, to queen it: but, I pray you,
What think you of a duchess? have you limbs
To bear that load of title?
No, in truth.
Then you are weakly made: pluck off a little;
I would not be a young count in your way,
For more than blushing comes to: if your back
Cannot vouchsafe this burthen,tis too weak
Ever to get a boy.
How you do talk!
I swear again, I would not be a queen
For all the world.
In faith, for little England
Yould venture an emballing: I myself
Would for Carnarvonshire, although there longd
No more to the crown but that. Lo, who comes here?
Enter Chamberlain
Good morrow, ladies. What weret worth to know
The secret of your conference?
My good lord,
Not your demand; it values not your asking:
Our mistress sorrows we were pitying.
It was a gentle business, and becoming
The action of good women: there is hope
All will be well.
Now, I pray God, amen!
You bear a gentle mind, and heavenly blessings
Follow such creatures. That you may, fair lady,
Perceive I speak sincerely, and high notes
Taen of your many virtues, the kings majesty
Commends his good opinion of you, and
Does purpose honour to you no less flowing
Than Marchioness of Pembroke: to which title
A thousand pound a year, annual support,
Out of his grace he adds.
I do not know
What kind of my obedience I should tender;
More than my all is nothing: nor my prayers
Are not words duly hallowd, nor my wishes
More worth than empty vanities; yet prayers and wishes
Are all I can return. Beseech your lordship,
Vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience,
As from a blushing handmaid, to his highness;
Whose health and royalty I pray for.
Lady,
I shall not fail to approve the fair conceit
The king hath of you.
Aside
I have perused her well;
Beauty and honour in her are so mingled
That they have caught the king: and who knows yet
But from this lady may proceed a gem
To lighten all this isle? Ill to the king,
And say I spoke with you.
Exit Chamberlain
My honourd lord.
Why, this it is; see, see!
I have been begging sixteen years in court,
Am yet a courtier beggarly, nor could
Come pat betwixt too early and too late
For any suit of pounds; and you, O fate!
A very fresh-fish here--fie, fie, fie upon
This compelld fortune!--have your mouth filld up
Before you open it.
This is strange to me.
How tastes it? is it bitter? forty pence, no.
There was a lady once, tis an old story,
That would not be a queen, that would she not,
For all the mud in Egypt: have you heard it?
Come, you are pleasant.
With your theme, I could
Oermount the lark. The Marchioness of Pembroke!
A thousand pounds a year for pure respect!
No other obligation! By my life,
That promises moe thousands: honours train
Is longer than his foreskirt. By this time
I know your back will bear a duchess: say,
Are you not stronger than you were?
Good lady,
Make yourself mirth with your particular fancy,
And leave me out ont. Would I had no being,
If this salute my blood a jot: it faints me,
To think what follows.
The queen is comfortless, and we forgetful
In our long absence: pray, do not deliver
What here youve heard to her.
What do you think me?
Exeunt
SCENE IV. A hall in Black-Friars.
Trumpets, sennet, and cornets. Enter two Vergers,  with short silver wands; next them, two Scribes, in  the habit of doctors; after them, CANTERBURY alone;  after him, LINCOLN, Ely, Rochester, and Saint  Asaph; next them, with some small distance, follows  a Gentleman bearing the purse, with the great seal,  and a cardinals hat; then two Priests, bearing  each a silver cross; then a Gentleman-usher  bare-headed, accompanied with a Sergeant-at-arms  bearing a silver mace; then two Gentlemen bearing  two great silver pillars; after them, side by side,  CARDINAL WOLSEY and CARDINAL CAMPEIUS; two Noblemen  with the sword and mace. KING HENRY VIII takes  place under the cloth of state; CARDINAL WOLSEY and  CARDINAL CAMPEIUS sit under him as judges. QUEEN  KATHARINE takes place some distance from KING  HENRY VIII. The Bishops place themselves on each  side the court, in manner of a consistory; below  them, the Scribes. The Lords sit next the Bishops.  The rest of the Attendants stand in convenient order about the stage
Whilst our commission from Rome is read,
Let silence be commanded.
Whats the need?
It hath already publicly been read,
And on all sides the authority allowd;
You may, then, spare that time.
Bet so. Proceed.
Say, Henry King of England, come into the court.
Henry King of England,  and c.
Here.
Say, Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
Katharine Queen of England,  and c.
QUEEN KATHARINE makes no answer, rises out of her  chair, goes about the court, comes to KING HENRY VIII, and kneels at his feet; then speaks
Sir, I desire you do me right and justice;
And to bestow your pity on me: for
I am a most poor woman, and a stranger,
Born out of your dominions; having here
No judge indifferent, nor no more assurance
Of equal friendship and proceeding. Alas, sir,
In what have I offended you? what cause
Hath my behavior given to your displeasure,
That thus you should proceed to put me off,
And take your good grace from me? Heaven witness,
I have been to you a true and humble wife,
At all times to your will conformable;
Ever in fear to kindle your dislike,
Yea, subject to your countenance, glad or sorry
As I saw it inclined: when was the hour
I ever contradicted your desire,
Or made it not mine too? Or which of your friends
Have I not strove to love, although I knew
He were mine enemy? what friend of mine
That had to him derived your anger, did I
Continue in my liking? nay, gave notice
He was from thence discharged. Sir, call to mind
That I have been your wife, in this obedience,
Upward of twenty years, and have been blest
With many children by you: if, in the course
And process of this time, you can report,
And prove it too, against mine honour aught,
My bond to wedlock, or my love and duty,
Against your sacred person, in Gods name,
Turn me away; and let the foulst contempt
Shut door upon me, and so give me up
To the sharpst kind of justice. Please you sir,
The king, your father, was reputed for
A prince most prudent, of an excellent
And unmatchd wit and judgment: Ferdinand,
My father, king of Spain, was reckond one
The wisest prince that there had reignd by many
A year before: it is not to be questiond
That they had gatherd a wise council to them
Of every realm, that did debate this business,
Who deemd our marriage lawful: wherefore I humbly
Beseech you, sir, to spare me, till I may
Be by my friends in Spain advised; whose counsel
I will implore: if not, i the name of God,
Your pleasure be fulfilld!
You have here, lady,
And of your choice, these reverend fathers; men
Of singular integrity and learning,
Yea, the elect o the land, who are assembled
To plead your cause: it shall be therefore bootless
That longer you desire the court; as well
For your own quiet, as to rectify
What is unsettled in the king.
His grace
Hath spoken well and justly: therefore, madam,
Its fit this royal session do proceed;
And that, without delay, their arguments
Be now produced and heard.
Lord cardinal,
To you I speak.
Your pleasure, madam?
Sir,
I am about to weep; but, thinking that
We are a queen, or long have dreamd so, certain
The daughter of a king, my drops of tears
Ill turn to sparks of fire.
Be patient yet.
I will, when you are humble; nay, before,
Or God will punish me. I do believe,
Induced by potent circumstances, that
You are mine enemy, and make my challenge
You shall not be my judge: for it is you
Have blown this coal betwixt my lord and me;
Which Gods dew quench! Therefore I say again,
I utterly abhor, yea, from my soul
Refuse you for my judge; whom, yet once more,
I hold my most malicious foe, and think not
At all a friend to truth.
I do profess
You speak not like yourself; who ever yet
Have stood to charity, and displayd the effects
Of disposition gentle, and of wisdom
Oertopping womans power. Madam, you do me wrong:
I have no spleen against you; nor injustice
For you or any: how far I have proceeded,
Or how far further shall, is warranted
By a commission from the consistory,
Yea, the whole consistory of Rome. You charge me
That I have blown this coal: I do deny it:
The king is present: if it be known to him
That I gainsay my deed, how may he wound,
And worthily, my falsehood! yea, as much
As you have done my truth. If he know
That I am free of your report, he knows
I am not of your wrong. Therefore in him
It lies to cure me: and the cure is, to
Remove these thoughts from you: the which before
His highness shall speak in, I do beseech
You, gracious madam, to unthink your speaking
And to say so no more.
My lord, my lord,
I am a simple woman, much too weak
To oppose your cunning. Youre meek and
humble-mouthd;
You sign your place and calling, in full seeming,
With meekness and humility; but your heart
Is crammd with arrogancy, spleen, and pride.
You have, by fortune and his highness favours,
Gone slightly oer low steps and now are mounted
Where powers are your retainers, and your words,
Domestics to you, serve your will ast please
Yourself pronounce their office. I must tell you,
You tender more your persons honour than
Your high profession spiritual: that again
I do refuse you for my judge; and here,
Before you all, appeal unto the pope,
To bring my whole cause fore his holiness,
And to be judged by him.
She curtsies to KING HENRY VIII, and offers to depart
The queen is obstinate,
Stubborn to justice, apt to accuse it, and
Disdainful to be tried byt: tis not well.
Shes going away.
Call her again.
Katharine Queen of England, come into the court.
Madam, you are calld back.
What need you note it? pray you, keep your way:
When you are calld, return. Now, the Lord help,
They vex me past my patience! Pray you, pass on:
I will not tarry; no, nor ever more
Upon this business my appearance make
In any of their courts.
Exeunt QUEEN KATHARINE and her Attendants
Go thy ways, Kate:
That man i the world who shall report he has
A better wife, let him in nought be trusted,
For speaking false in that: thou art, alone,
If thy rare qualities, sweet gentleness,
Thy meekness saint-like, wife-like government,
Obeying in commanding, and thy parts
Sovereign and pious else, could speak thee out,
The queen of earthly queens: shes noble born;
And, like her true nobility, she has
Carried herself towards me.
Most gracious sir,
In humblest manner I require your highness,
That it shall please you to declare, in hearing
Of all these ears,--for where I am robbd and bound,
There must I be unloosed, although not there
At once and fully satisfied,--whether ever I
Did broach this business to your highness; or
Laid any scruple in your way, which might
Induce you to the question ont? or ever
Have to you, but with thanks to God for such
A royal lady, spake one the least word that might
Be to the prejudice of her present state,
Or touch of her good person?
My lord cardinal,
I do excuse you; yea, upon mine honour,
I free you fromt. You are not to be taught
That you have many enemies, that know not
Why they are so, but, like to village-curs,
Bark when their fellows do: by some of these
The queen is put in anger. Youre excused:
But will you be more justified? You ever
Have wishd the sleeping of this business; never desired
It to be stirrd; but oft have hinderd, oft,
The passages made toward it: on my honour,
I speak my good lord cardinal to this point,
And thus far clear him. Now, what moved me tot,
I will be bold with time and your attention:
Then mark the inducement. Thus it came; give heed tot:
My conscience first received a tenderness,
Scruple, and prick, on certain speeches utterd
By the Bishop of Bayonne, then French ambassador;
Who had been hither sent on the debating
A marriage twixt the Duke of Orleans and
Our daughter Mary: i the progress of this business,
Ere a determinate resolution, he,
I mean the bishop, did require a respite;
Wherein he might the king his lord advertise
Whether our daughter were legitimate,
Respecting this our marriage with the dowager,
Sometimes our brothers wife. This respite shook
The bosom of my conscience, enterd me,
Yea, with a splitting power, and made to tremble
The region of my breast; which forced such way,
That many mazed considerings did throng
And pressd in with this caution. First, methought
I stood not in the smile of heaven; who had
Commanded nature, that my ladys womb,
If it conceived a male child by me, should
Do no more offices of life tot than
The grave does to the dead; for her male issue
Or died where they were made, or shortly after
This world had aird them: hence I took a thought,
This was a judgment on me; that my kingdom,
Well worthy the best heir o the world, should not
Be gladded int by me: then follows, that
I weighd the danger which my realms stood in
By this my issues fail; and that gave to me
Many a groaning throe. Thus hulling in
The wild sea of my conscience, I did steer
Toward this remedy, whereupon we are
Now present here together: thats to say,
I meant to rectify my conscience,--which
I then did feel full sick, and yet not well,--
By all the reverend fathers of the land
And doctors learnd: first I began in private
With you, my Lord of Lincoln; you remember
How under my oppression I did reek,
When I first moved you.
Very well, my liege.
I have spoke long: be pleased yourself to say
How far you satisfied me.
So please your highness,
The question did at first so stagger me,
Bearing a state of mighty moment int
And consequence of dread, that I committed
The daringst counsel which I had to doubt;
And did entreat your highness to this course
Which you are running here.
I then moved you,
My Lord of Canterbury; and got your leave
To make this present summons: unsolicited
I left no reverend person in this court;
But by particular consent proceeded
Under your hands and seals: therefore, go on:
For no dislike i the world against the person
Of the good queen, but the sharp thorny points
Of my alleged reasons, drive this forward:
Prove but our marriage lawful, by my life
And kingly dignity, we are contented
To wear our mortal state to come with her,
Katharine our queen, before the primest creature
Thats paragond o the world.
So please your highness,
The queen being absent, tis a needful fitness
That we adjourn this court till further day:
Meanwhile must be an earnest motion
Made to the queen, to call back her appeal
She intends unto his holiness.
[Aside]I may perceive
These cardinals trifle with me: I abhor
This dilatory sloth and tricks of Rome.
My learnd and well-beloved servant, Cranmer,
Prithee, return: with thy approach, I know,
My comfort comes along. Break up the court:
I say, set on.
Exeunt in manner as they entered
ACT III
SCENE I. London. QUEEN KATHARINEs apartments.
Enter QUEEN KATHARINE and her Women, as at work
Take thy lute, wench: my soul grows sad with troubles;
Sing, and disperse em, if thou canst: leave working.
SONG
Orpheus with his lute made trees,
And the mountain tops that freeze,
Bow themselves when he did sing:
To his music plants and flowers
Ever sprung; as sun and showers
There had made a lasting spring.
Every thing that heard him play,
Even the billows of the sea,
Hung their heads, and then lay by.
In sweet music is such art,
Killing care and grief of heart
Fall asleep, or hearing, die.
Enter a Gentleman
How now!
Ant please your grace, the two great cardinals
Wait in the presence.
Would they speak with me?
They willd me say so, madam.
Pray their graces
To come near.
Exit Gentleman
What can be their business
With me, a poor weak woman, falln from favour?
I do not like their coming. Now I think ont,
They should be good men; their affairs as righteous:
But all hoods make not monks.
Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY and CARDINAL CAMPEIUS
Peace to your highness!
Your graces find me here part of a housewife,
I would be all, against the worst may happen.
What are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?
May it please you noble madam, to withdraw
Into your private chamber, we shall give you
The full cause of our coming.
Speak it here:
Theres nothing I have done yet, o my conscience,
Deserves a corner: would all other women
Could speak this with as free a soul as I do!
My lords, I care not, so much I am happy
Above a number, if my actions
Were tried by every tongue, every eye saw em,
Envy and base opinion set against em,
I know my life so even. If your business
Seek me out, and that way I am wife in,
Out with it boldly: truth loves open dealing.
Tanta est erga te mentis integritas, regina
serenissima,--
O, good my lord, no Latin;
I am not such a truant since my coming,
As not to know the language I have lived in:
A strange tongue makes my cause more strange,
suspicious;
Pray, speak in English: here are some will thank you,
If you speak truth, for their poor mistress sake;
Believe me, she has had much wrong: lord cardinal,
The willingst sin I ever yet committed
May be absolved in English.
Noble lady,
I am sorry my integrity should breed,
And service to his majesty and you,
So deep suspicion, where all faith was meant.
We come not by the way of accusation,
To taint that honour every good tongue blesses,
Nor to betray you any way to sorrow,
You have too much, good lady; but to know
How you stand minded in the weighty difference
Between the king and you; and to deliver,
Like free and honest men, our just opinions
And comforts to your cause.
Most honourd madam,
My Lord of York, out of his noble nature,
Zeal and obedience he still bore your grace,
Forgetting, like a good man your late censure
Both of his truth and him, which was too far,
Offers, as I do, in a sign of peace,
His service and his counsel.
[Aside]To betray me.--
My lords, I thank you both for your good wills;
Ye speak like honest men; pray God, ye prove so!
But how to make ye suddenly an answer,
In such a point of weight, so near mine honour,--
More near my life, I fear,--with my weak wit,
And to such men of gravity and learning,
In truth, I know not. I was set at work
Among my maids: full little, God knows, looking
Either for such men or such business.
For her sake that I have been,--for I feel
The last fit of my greatness,--good your graces,
Let me have time and counsel for my cause:
Alas, I am a woman, friendless, hopeless!
Madam, you wrong the kings love with these fears:
Your hopes and friends are infinite.
In England
But little for my profit: can you think, lords,
That any Englishman dare give me counsel?
Or be a known friend, gainst his highness pleasure,
Though he be grown so desperate to be honest,
And live a subject? Nay, forsooth, my friends,
They that must weigh out my afflictions,
They that my trust must grow to, live not here:
They are, as all my other comforts, far hence
In mine own country, lords.
I would your grace
Would leave your griefs, and take my counsel.
How, sir?
Put your main cause into the kings protection;
Hes loving and most gracious: twill be much
Both for your honour better and your cause;
For if the trial of the law oertake ye,
Youll part away disgraced.
He tells you rightly.
Ye tell me what ye wish for both,--my ruin:
Is this your Christian counsel? out upon ye!
Heaven is above all yet; there sits a judge
That no king can corrupt.
Your rage mistakes us.
The more shame for ye: holy men I thought ye,
Upon my soul, two reverend cardinal virtues;
But cardinal sins and hollow hearts I fear ye:
Mend em, for shame, my lords. Is this your comfort?
The cordial that ye bring a wretched lady,
A woman lost among ye, laughd at, scornd?
I will not wish ye half my miseries;
I have more charity: but say, I warnd ye;
Take heed, for heavens sake, take heed, lest at once
The burthen of my sorrows fall upon ye.
Madam, this is a mere distraction;
You turn the good we offer into envy.
Ye turn me into nothing: woe upon ye
And all such false professors! would you have me--
If you have any justice, any pity;
If ye be any thing but churchmens habits--
Put my sick cause into his hands that hates me?
Alas, has banishd me his bed already,
His love, too long ago! I am old, my lords,
And all the fellowship I hold now with him
Is only my obedience. What can happen
To me above this wretchedness? all your studies
Make me a curse like this.
Your fears are worse.
Have I lived thus long--let me speak myself,
Since virtue finds no friends--a wife, a true one?
A woman, I dare say without vain-glory,
Never yet branded with suspicion?
Have I with all my full affections
Still met the king? loved him next heaven?
obeyd him?
Been, out of fondness, superstitious to him?
Almost forgot my prayers to content him?
And am I thus rewarded? tis not well, lords.
Bring me a constant woman to her husband,
One that neer dreamd a joy beyond his pleasure;
And to that woman, when she has done most,
Yet will I add an honour, a great patience.
Madam, you wander from the good we aim at.
My lord, I dare not make myself so guilty,
To give up willingly that noble title
Your master wed me to: nothing but death
Shall eer divorce my dignities.
Pray, hear me.
Would I had never trod this English earth,
Or felt the flatteries that grow upon it!
Ye have angels faces, but heaven knows your hearts.
What will become of me now, wretched lady!
I am the most unhappy woman living.
Alas, poor wenches, where are now your fortunes!
Shipwreckd upon a kingdom, where no pity,
No friend, no hope; no kindred weep for me;
Almost no grave allowd me: like the lily,
That once was mistress of the field and flourishd,
Ill hang my head and perish.
If your grace
Could but be brought to know our ends are honest,
Yould feel more comfort: why should we, good lady,
Upon what cause, wrong you? alas, our places,
The way of our profession is against it:
We are to cure such sorrows, not to sow em.
For goodness sake, consider what you do;
How you may hurt yourself, ay, utterly
Grow from the kings acquaintance, by this carriage.
The hearts of princes kiss obedience,
So much they love it; but to stubborn spirits
They swell, and grow as terrible as storms.
I know you have a gentle, noble temper,
A soul as even as a calm: pray, think us
Those we profess, peace-makers, friends, and servants.
Madam, youll find it so. You wrong your virtues
With these weak womens fears: a noble spirit,
As yours was put into you, ever casts
Such doubts, as false coin, from it. The king loves you;
Beware you lose it not: for us, if you please
To trust us in your business, we are ready
To use our utmost  studies in your service.
Do what ye will, my lords: and, pray, forgive me,
If I have used myself unmannerly;
You know I am a woman, lacking wit
To make a seemly answer to such persons.
Pray, do my service to his majesty:
He has my heart yet; and shall have my prayers
While I shall have my life. Come, reverend fathers,
Bestow your counsels on me: she now begs,
That little thought, when she set footing here,
She should have bought her dignities so dear.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Ante-chamber to KING HENRY VIIIs apartment.
Enter NORFOLK, SUFFOLK, SURREY, and Chamberlain
If you will now unite in your complaints,
And force them with a constancy, the cardinal
Cannot stand under them: if you omit
The offer of this time, I cannot promise
But that you shall sustain moe new disgraces,
With these you bear already.
I am joyful
To meet the least occasion that may give me
Remembrance of my father-in-law, the duke,
To be revenged on him.
Which of the peers
Have uncontemnd gone by him, or at least
Strangely neglected? when did he regard
The stamp of nobleness in any person
Out of himself?
My lords, you speak your pleasures:
What he deserves of you and me I know;
What we can do to him, though now the time
Gives way to us, I much fear. If you cannot
Bar his access to the king, never attempt
Any thing on him; for he hath a witchcraft
Over the king ins tongue.
O, fear him not;
His spell in that is out: the king hath found
Matter against him that for ever mars
The honey of his language. No, hes settled,
Not to come off, in his displeasure.
Sir,
I should be glad to hear such news as this
Once every hour.
Believe it, this is true:
In the divorce his contrary proceedings
Are all unfolded wherein he appears
As I would wish mine enemy.
How came
His practises to light?
Most strangely.
O, how, how?
The cardinals letters to the pope miscarried,
And came to the eye o the king: wherein was read,
How that the cardinal did entreat his holiness
To stay the judgment o the divorce; for if
It did take place, I do, quoth he, perceive
My king is tangled in affection to
A creature of the queens, Lady Anne Bullen.
Has the king this?
Believe it.
Will this work?
The king in this perceives him, how he coasts
And hedges his own way. But in this point
All his tricks founder, and he brings his physic
After his patients death: the king already
Hath married the fair lady.
Would he had!
May you be happy in your wish, my lord
For, I profess, you have it.
Now, all my joy
Trace the conjunction!
My amen tot!
All mens!
Theres order given for her coronation:
Marry, this is yet but young, and may be left
To some ears unrecounted. But, my lords,
She is a gallant creature, and complete
In mind and feature: I persuade me, from her
Will fall some blessing to this land, which shall
In it be memorised.
But, will the king
Digest this letter of the cardinals?
The Lord forbid!
Marry, amen!
No, no;
There be moe wasps that buzz about his nose
Will make this sting the sooner. Cardinal Campeius
Is stoln away to Rome; hath taen no leave;
Has left the cause o the king unhandled; and
Is posted, as the agent of our cardinal,
To second all his plot. I do assure you
The king cried Ha! at this.
Now, God incense him,
And let him cry Ha! louder!
But, my lord,
When returns Cranmer?
He is returnd in his opinions; which
Have satisfied the king for his divorce,
Together with all famous colleges
Almost in Christendom: shortly, I believe,
His second marriage shall be publishd, and
Her coronation. Katharine no more
Shall be calld queen, but princess dowager
And widow to Prince Arthur.
This same Cranmers
A worthy fellow, and hath taen much pain
In the kings business.
He has; and we shall see him
For it an archbishop.
So I hear.
Tis so.
The cardinal!
Enter CARDINAL WOLSEY and CROMWELL
Observe, observe, hes moody.
The packet, Cromwell.
Gavet you the king?
To his own hand, ins bedchamber.
Lookd he o the inside of the paper?
Presently
He did unseal them: and the first he viewd,
He did it with a serious mind; a heed
Was in his countenance. You he bade
Attend him here this morning.
Is he ready
To come abroad?
I think, by this he is.
Leave me awhile.
Exit CROMWELL
Aside
It shall be to the Duchess of Alencon,
The French kings sister: he shall marry her.
Anne Bullen! No; Ill no Anne Bullens for him:
Theres more int than fair visage. Bullen!
No, well no Bullens. Speedily I wish
To hear from Rome. The Marchioness of Pembroke!
Hes discontented.
May be, he hears the king
Does whet his anger to him.
Sharp enough,
Lord, for thy justice!
[Aside]  The late queens gentlewoman,
a knights daughter,
To be her mistress mistress! the queens queen!
This candle burns not clear: tis I must snuff it;
Then out it goes. What though I know her virtuous
And well deserving? yet I know her for
A spleeny Lutheran; and not wholesome to
