Our cause, that she should lie i the bosom of
Our hard-ruled king. Again, there is sprung up
An heretic, an arch one, Cranmer; one
Hath crawld into the favour of the king,
And is his oracle.
He is vexd at something.
I would twere something that would fret the string,
The master-cord ons heart!
Enter KING HENRY VIII, reading of a schedule, and LOVELL
The king, the king!
What piles of wealth hath he accumulated
To his own portion! and what expense by the hour
Seems to flow from him! How, i the name of thrift,
Does he rake this together! Now, my lords,
Saw you the cardinal?
My lord, we have
Stood here observing him: some strange commotion
Is in his brain: he bites his lip, and starts;
Stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground,
Then lays his finger on his temple, straight
Springs out into fast gait; then stops again,
Strikes his breast hard, and anon he casts
His eye against the moon: in most strange postures
We have seen him set himself.
It may well be;
There is a mutiny ins mind. This morning
Papers of state he sent me to peruse,
As I required: and wot you what I found
There,--on my conscience, put unwittingly?
Forsooth, an inventory, thus importing;
The several parcels of his plate, his treasure,
Rich stuffs, and ornaments of household; which
I find at such proud rate, that it out-speaks
Possession of a subject.
Its heavens will:
Some spirit put this paper in the packet,
To bless your eye withal.
If we did think
His contemplation were above the earth,
And fixd on spiritual object, he should still
Dwell in his musings: but I am afraid
His thinkings are below the moon, not worth
His serious considering.
King HENRY VIII takes his seat; whispers LOVELL, who goes to CARDINAL WOLSEY
Heaven forgive me!
Ever God bless your highness!
Good my lord,
You are full of heavenly stuff, and bear the inventory
Of your best graces in your mind; the which
You were now running oer: you have scarce time
To steal from spiritual leisure a brief span
To keep your earthly audit: sure, in that
I deem you an ill husband, and am glad
To have you therein my companion.
Sir,
For holy offices I have a time; a time
To think upon the part of business which
I bear i the state; and nature does require
Her times of preservation, which perforce
I, her frail son, amongst my brethren mortal,
Must give my tendence to.
You have said well.
And ever may your highness yoke together,
As I will lend you cause, my doing well
With my well saying!
Tis well said again;
And tis a kind of good deed to say well:
And yet words are no deeds. My father loved you:
His said he did; and with his deed did crown
His word upon you. Since I had my office,
I have kept you next my heart; have not alone
Employd you where high profits might come home,
But pared my present havings, to bestow
My bounties upon you.
[Aside]             What should this mean?
[Aside]  The Lord increase this business!
Have I not made you,
The prime man of the state? I pray you, tell me,
If what I now pronounce you have found true:
And, if you may confess it, say withal,
If you are bound to us or no. What say you?
My sovereign, I confess your royal graces,
Showerd on me daily, have been more than could
My studied purposes requite; which went
Beyond all mans endeavours: my endeavours
Have ever come too short of my desires,
Yet filed with my abilities: mine own ends
Have been mine so that evermore they pointed
To the good of your most sacred person and
The profit of the state. For your great graces
Heapd upon me, poor undeserver, I
Can nothing render but allegiant thanks,
My prayers to heaven for you, my loyalty,
Which ever has and ever shall be growing,
Till death, that winter, kill it.
Fairly answerd;
A loyal and obedient subject is
Therein illustrated: the honour of it
Does pay the act of it; as, i the contrary,
The foulness is the punishment. I presume
That, as my hand has opend bounty to you,
My heart droppd love, my power raind honour, more
On you than any; so your hand and heart,
Your brain, and every function of your power,
Should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty,
As twere in loves particular, be more
To me, your friend, than any.
I do profess
That for your highness good I ever labourd
More than mine own; that am, have, and will be--
Though all the world should crack their duty to you,
And throw it from their soul; though perils did
Abound, as thick as thought could make em, and
Appear in forms more horrid,--yet my duty,
As doth a rock against the chiding flood,
Should the approach of this wild river break,
And stand unshaken yours.
Tis nobly spoken:
Take notice, lords, he has a loyal breast,
For you have seen him opent. Read oer this;
Giving him papers
And after, this: and then to breakfast with
What appetite you have.
Exit KING HENRY VIII, frowning upon CARDINAL WOLSEY: the Nobles throng after him, smiling and whispering
What should this mean?
What sudden angers this? how have I reapd it?
He parted frowning from me, as if ruin
Leapd from his eyes: so looks the chafed lion
Upon the daring huntsman that has galld him;
Then makes him nothing. I must read this paper;
I fear, the story of his anger. Tis so;
This paper has undone me: tis the account
Of all that world of wealth I have drawn together
For mine own ends; indeed, to gain the popedom,
And fee my friends in Rome. O negligence!
Fit for a fool to fall by: what cross devil
Made me put this main secret in the packet
I sent the king? Is there no way to cure this?
No new device to beat this from his brains?
I know twill stir him strongly; yet I know
A way, if it take right, in spite of fortune
Will bring me off again. Whats this? To the Pope!
The letter, as I live, with all the business
I writ tos holiness. Nay then, farewell!
I have touchd the highest point of all my greatness;
And, from that full meridian of my glory,
I haste now to my setting: I shall fall
Like a bright exhalation m the evening,
And no man see me more.
Re-enter to CARDINAL WOLSEY, NORFOLK and SUFFOLK, SURREY, and the Chamberlain
Hear the kings pleasure, cardinal: who commands you
To render up the great seal presently
Into our hands; and to confine yourself
To Asher House, my Lord of Winchesters,
Till you hear further from his highness.
Stay:
Wheres your commission, lords? words cannot carry
Authority so weighty.
Who dare cross em,
Bearing the kings will from his mouth expressly?
Till I find more than will or words to do it,
I mean your malice, know, officious lords,
I dare and must deny it. Now I feel
Of what coarse metal ye are moulded, envy:
How eagerly ye follow my disgraces,
As if it fed ye! and how sleek and wanton
Ye appear in every thing may bring my ruin!
Follow your envious courses, men of malice;
You have Christian warrant for em, and, no doubt,
In time will find their fit rewards. That seal,
You ask with such a violence, the king,
Mine and your master, with his own hand gave me;
Bade me enjoy it, with the place and honours,
During my life; and, to confirm his goodness,
Tied it by letters-patents: now, wholl take it?
The king, that gave it.
It must be himself, then.
Thou art a proud traitor, priest.
Proud lord, thou liest:
Within these forty hours Surrey durst better
Have burnt that tongue than said so.
Thy ambition,
Thou scarlet sin, robbd this bewailing land
Of noble Buckingham, my father-in-law:
The heads of all thy brother cardinals,
With thee and all thy best parts bound together,
Weighd not a hair of his. Plague of your policy!
You sent me deputy for Ireland;
Far from his succor, from the king, from all
That might have mercy on the fault thou gavest him;
Whilst your great goodness, out of holy pity,
Absolved him with an axe.
This, and all else
This talking lord can lay upon my credit,
I answer is most false. The duke by law
Found his deserts: how innocent I was
From any private malice in his end,
His noble jury and foul cause can witness.
If I loved many words, lord, I should tell you
You have as little honesty as honour,
That in the way of loyalty and truth
Toward the king, my ever royal master,
Dare mate a sounder man than Surrey can be,
And all that love his follies.
By my soul,
Your long coat, priest, protects you; thou
shouldst feel
My sword i the life-blood of thee else. My lords,
Can ye endure to hear this arrogance?
And from this fellow? if we live thus tamely,
To be thus jaded by a piece of scarlet,
Farewell nobility; let his grace go forward,
And dare us with his cap like larks.
All goodness
Is poison to thy stomach.
Yes, that goodness
Of gleaning all the lands wealth into one,
Into your own hands, cardinal, by extortion;
The goodness of your intercepted packets
You writ to the pope against the king: your goodness,
Since you provoke me, shall be most notorious.
My Lord of Norfolk, as you are truly noble,
As you respect the common good, the state
Of our despised nobility, our issues,
Who, if he live, will scarce be gentlemen,
Produce the grand sum of his sins, the articles
Collected from his life. Ill startle you
Worse than the scaring bell, when the brown wench
Lay kissing in your arms, lord cardinal.
How much, methinks, I could despise this man,
But that I am bound in charity against it!
Those articles, my lord, are in the kings hand:
But, thus much, they are foul ones.
So much fairer
And spotless shall mine innocence arise,
When the king knows my truth.
This cannot save you:
I thank my memory, I yet remember
Some of these articles; and out they shall.
Now, if you can blush and cry guilty, cardinal,
Youll show a little honesty.
Speak on, sir;
I dare your worst objections: if I blush,
It is to see a nobleman want manners.
I had rather want those than my head. Have at you!
First, that, without the kings assent or knowledge,
You wrought to be a legate; by which power
You maimd the jurisdiction of all bishops.
Then, that in all you writ to Rome, or else
To foreign princes, Ego et Rex meus
Was still inscribed; in which you brought the king
To be your servant.
Then that, without the knowledge
Either of king or council, when you went
Ambassador to the emperor, you made bold
To carry into Flanders the great seal.
Item, you sent a large commission
To Gregory de Cassado, to conclude,
Without the kings will or the states allowance,
A league between his highness and Ferrara.
That, out of mere ambition, you have caused
Your holy hat to be stampd on the kings coin.
Then that you have sent innumerable substance--
By what means got, I leave to your own conscience--
To furnish Rome, and to prepare the ways
You have for dignities; to the mere undoing
Of all the kingdom. Many more there are;
Which, since they are of you, and odious,
I will not taint my mouth with.
O my lord,
Press not a falling man too far! tis virtue:
His faults lie open to the laws; let them,
Not you, correct him. My heart weeps to see him
So little of his great self.
I forgive him.
Lord cardinal, the kings further pleasure is,
Because all those things you have done of late,
By your power legatine, within this kingdom,
Fall into the compass of a praemunire,
That therefore such a writ be sued against you;
To forfeit all your goods, lands, tenements,
Chattels, and whatsoever, and to be
Out of the kings protection. This is my charge.
And so well leave you to your meditations
How to live better. For your stubborn answer
About the giving back the great seal to us,
The king shall know it, and, no doubt, shall thank you.
So fare you well, my little good lord cardinal.
Exeunt all but CARDINAL WOLSEY
So farewell to the little good you bear me.
Farewell! a long farewell, to all my greatness!
This is the state of man: to-day he puts forth
The tender leaves of hopes; to-morrow blossoms,
And bears his blushing honours thick upon him;
The third day comes a frost, a killing frost,
And, when he thinks, good easy man, full surely
His greatness is a-ripening, nips his root,
And then he falls, as I do. I have ventured,
Like little wanton boys that swim on bladders,
This many summers in a sea of glory,
But far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride
At length broke under me and now has left me,
Weary and old with service, to the mercy
Of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me.
Vain pomp and glory of this world, I hate ye:
I feel my heart new opend. O, how wretched
Is that poor man that hangs on princes favours!
There is, betwixt that smile we would aspire to,
That sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin,
More pangs and fears than wars or women have:
And when he falls, he falls like Lucifer,
Never to hope again.
Enter CROMWELL, and stands amazed
Why, how now, Cromwell!
I have no power to speak, sir.
What, amazed
At my misfortunes? can thy spirit wonder
A great man should decline? Nay, an you weep,
I am falln indeed.
How does your grace?
Why, well;
Never so truly happy, my good Cromwell.
I know myself now; and I feel within me
A peace above all earthly dignities,
A still and quiet conscience. The king has cured me,
I humbly thank his grace; and from these shoulders,
These ruind pillars, out of pity, taken
A load would sink a navy, too much honour:
O, tis a burthen, Cromwell, tis a burthen
Too heavy for a man that hopes for heaven!
I am glad your grace has made that right use of it.
I hope I have: I am able now, methinks,
Out of a fortitude of soul I feel,
To endure more miseries and greater far
Than my weak-hearted enemies dare offer.
What news abroad?
The heaviest and the worst
Is your displeasure with the king.
God bless him!
The next is, that Sir Thomas More is chosen
Lord chancellor in your place.
Thats somewhat sudden:
But hes a learned man. May he continue
Long in his highness favour, and do justice
For truths sake and his conscience; that his bones,
When he has run his course and sleeps in blessings,
May have a tomb of orphans tears wept on em! What more?
That Cranmer is returnd with welcome,
Installd lord archbishop of Canterbury.
Thats news indeed.
Last, that the Lady Anne,
Whom the king hath in secrecy long married,
This day was viewd in open as his queen,
Going to chapel; and the voice is now
Only about her coronation.
There was the weight that pulld me down. O Cromwell,
The king has gone beyond me: all my glories
In that one woman I have lost for ever:
No sun shall ever usher forth mine honours,
Or gild again the noble troops that waited
Upon my smiles. Go, get thee from me, Cromwell;
I am a poor falln man, unworthy now
To be thy lord and master: seek the king;
That sun, I pray, may never set! I have told him
What and how true thou art: he will advance thee;
Some little memory of me will stir him--
I know his noble nature--not to let
Thy hopeful service perish too: good Cromwell,
Neglect him not; make use now, and provide
For thine own future safety.
O my lord,
Must I, then, leave you? must I needs forego
So good, so noble and so true a master?
Bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron,
With what a sorrow Cromwell leaves his lord.
The king shall have my service: but my prayers
For ever and for ever shall be yours.
Cromwell, I did not think to shed a tear
In all my miseries; but thou hast forced me,
Out of thy honest truth, to play the woman.
Lets dry our eyes: and thus far hear me, Cromwell;
And, when I am forgotten, as I shall be,
And sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention
Of me more must be heard of, say, I taught thee,
Say, Wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory,
And sounded all the depths and shoals of honour,
Found thee a way, out of his wreck, to rise in;
A sure and safe one, though thy master missd it.
Mark but my fall, and that that ruind me.
Cromwell, I charge thee, fling away ambition:
By that sin fell the angels; how can man, then,
The image of his Maker, hope to win by it?
Love thyself last: cherish those hearts that hate thee;
Corruption wins not more than honesty.
Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,
To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not:
Let all the ends thou aimst at be thy countrys,
Thy Gods, and truths; then if thou fallst,
O Cromwell,
Thou fallst a blessed martyr! Serve the king;
And,--prithee, lead me in:
There take an inventory of all I have,
To the last penny; tis the kings: my robe,
And my integrity to heaven, is all
I dare now call mine own. O Cromwell, Cromwell!
Had I but served my God with half the zeal
I served my king, he would not in mine age
Have left me naked to mine enemies.
Good sir, have patience.
So I have. Farewell
The hopes of court! my hopes in heaven do dwell.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. A street in Westminster.
Enter two Gentlemen, meeting one another
Youre well met once again.
So are you.
You come to take your stand here, and behold
The Lady Anne pass from her coronation?
Tis all my business. At our last encounter,
The Duke of Buckingham came from his trial.
Tis very true: but that time offerd sorrow;
This, general joy.
Tis well: the citizens,
I am sure, have shown at full their royal minds--
As, let em have their rights, they are ever forward--
In celebration of this day with shows,
Pageants and sights of honour.
Never greater,
Nor, Ill assure you, better taken, sir.
May I be bold to ask at what that contains,
That paper in your hand?
Yes; tis the list
Of those that claim their offices this day
By custom of the coronation.
The Duke of Suffolk is the first, and claims
To be high-steward; next, the Duke of Norfolk,
He to be earl marshal: you may read the rest.
I thank you, sir: had I not known those customs,
I should have been beholding to your paper.
But, I beseech you, whats become of Katharine,
The princess dowager? how goes her business?
That I can tell you too. The Archbishop
Of Canterbury, accompanied with other
Learned and reverend fathers of his order,
Held a late court at Dunstable, six miles off
From Ampthill where the princess lay; to which
She was often cited by them, but appeard not:
And, to be short, for not appearance and
The kings late scruple, by the main assent
Of all these learned men she was divorced,
And the late marriage made of none effect
Since which she was removed to Kimbolton,
Where she remains now sick.
Alas, good lady!
Trumpets
The trumpets sound: stand close, the queen is coming.
Hautboys
THE ORDER OF THE CORONATION
1. A lively flourish of Trumpets.
2. Then, two Judges.
3. Lord Chancellor, with the purse and mace
before him.
4. Choristers, singing.
Music
5. Mayor of London, bearing the mace. Then
Garter, in his coat of arms, and on his
head a gilt copper crown.
6. Marquess Dorset, bearing a sceptre of gold,
on his head a demi-coronal of gold. With
him, SURREY, bearing the rod of silver with
the dove, crowned with an earls coronet.
Collars of SS.
7. SUFFOLK, in his robe of estate, his coronet
on his head, bearing a long white wand, as
high-steward. With him, NORFOLK, with the
rod of marshalship, a coronet on his head.
Collars of SS.
8. A canopy borne by four of the Cinque-ports;
under it, QUEEN ANNE in her robe; in her hair
richly adorned with pearl, crowned. On each
side her, the Bishops of London and
Winchester.
9. The old Duchess of Norfolk, in a coronal of
gold, wrought with flowers, bearing QUEEN
ANNEs train.
10. Certain Ladies or Countesses, with plain
circlets of gold without flowers.
They pass over the stage in order and state
A royal train, believe me. These I know:
Whos that that bears the sceptre?
Marquess Dorset:
And that the Earl of Surrey, with the rod.
A bold brave gentleman. That should be
The Duke of Suffolk?
Tis the same: high-steward.
And that my Lord of Norfolk?
Yes;
Heaven bless thee!
Looking on QUEEN ANNE
Thou hast the sweetest face I ever lookd on.
Sir, as I have a soul, she is an angel;
Our king has all the Indies in his arms,
And more and richer, when he strains that lady:
I cannot blame his conscience.
They that bear
The cloth of honour over her, are four barons
Of the Cinque-ports.
Those men are happy; and so are all are near her.
I take it, she that carries up the train
Is that old noble lady, Duchess of Norfolk.
It is; and all the rest are countesses.
Their coronets say so. These are stars indeed;
And sometimes falling ones.
No more of that.
Exit procession, and then a great flourish of trumpets
Enter a third Gentleman
God save you, sir! where have you been broiling?
Among the crowd i the Abbey; where a finger
Could not be wedged in more: I am stifled
With the mere rankness of their joy.
You saw
The ceremony?
That I did.
How was it?
Well worth the seeing.
Good sir, speak it to us.
As well as I am able. The rich stream
Of lords and ladies, having brought the queen
To a prepared place in the choir, fell off
A distance from her; while her grace sat down
To rest awhile, some half an hour or so,
In a rich chair of state, opposing freely
The beauty of her person to the people.
Believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman
That ever lay by man: which when the people
Had the full view of, such a noise arose
As the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest,
As loud, and to as many tunes: hats, cloaks--
Doublets, I think,--flew up; and had their faces
Been loose, this day they had been lost. Such joy
I never saw before. Great-bellied women,
That had not half a week to go, like rams
In the old time of war, would shake the press,
And make em reel before em. No man living
Could say This is my wife there; all were woven
So strangely in one piece.
But, what followd?
At length her grace rose, and with modest paces
Came to the altar; where she kneeld, and saint-like
Cast her fair eyes to heaven and prayd devoutly.
Then rose again and bowd her to the people:
When by the Archbishop of Canterbury
She had all the royal makings of a queen;
As holy oil, Edward Confessors crown,
The rod, and bird of peace, and all such emblems
Laid nobly on her: which performd, the choir,
With all the choicest music of the kingdom,
Together sung Te Deum. So she parted,
And with the same full state paced back again
To York-place, where the feast is held.
Sir,
You must no more call it York-place, thats past;
For, since the cardinal fell, that titles lost:
Tis now the kings, and calld Whitehall.
I know it;
But tis so lately alterd, that the old name
Is fresh about me.
What two reverend bishops
Were those that went on each side of the queen?
Stokesly and Gardiner; the one of Winchester,
Newly preferrd from the kings secretary,
The other, London.
He of Winchester
Is held no great good lover of the archbishops,
The virtuous Cranmer.
All the land knows that:
However, yet there is no great breach; when it comes,
Cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.
Who may that be, I pray you?
Thomas Cromwell;
A man in much esteem with the king, and truly
A worthy friend. The king has made him master
O the jewel house,
And one, already, of the privy council.
He will deserve more.
Yes, without all doubt.
Come, gentlemen, ye shall go my way, which
Is to the court, and there ye shall be my guests:
Something I can command. As I walk thither,
Ill tell ye more.
You may command us, sir.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Kimbolton.
Enter KATHARINE, Dowager, sick; led between GRIFFITH, her gentleman usher, and PATIENCE, her woman
How does your grace?
O Griffith, sick to death!
My legs, like loaden branches, bow to the earth,
Willing to leave their burthen. Reach a chair:
So; now, methinks, I feel a little ease.
Didst thou not tell me, Griffith, as thou ledst me,
That the great child of honour, Cardinal Wolsey, Was dead?
Yes, madam; but I think your grace,
Out of the pain you sufferd, gave no ear tot.
Prithee, good Griffith, tell me how he died:
If well, he steppd before me, happily
For my example.
Well, the voice goes, madam:
For after the stout Earl Northumberland
Arrested him at York, and brought him forward,
As a man sorely tainted, to his answer,
He fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill
He could not sit his mule.
Alas, poor man!
At last, with easy roads, he came to Leicester,
Lodged in the abbey; where the reverend abbot,
With all his covent, honourably received him;
To whom he gave these words, O, father abbot,
An old man, broken with the storms of state,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye;
Give him a little earth for charity!
So went to bed; where eagerly his sickness
Pursued him still: and, three nights after this,
About the hour of eight, which he himself
Foretold should be his last, full of repentance,
Continual meditations, tears, and sorrows,
He gave his honours to the world again,
His blessed part to heaven, and slept in peace.
So may he rest; his faults lie gently on him!
Yet thus far, Griffith, give me leave to speak him,
And yet with charity. He was a man
Of an unbounded stomach, ever ranking
Himself with princes; one that, by suggestion,
Tied all the kingdom: simony was fair-play;
His own opinion was his law: i the presence
He would say untruths; and be ever double
Both in his words and meaning: he was never,
But where he meant to ruin, pitiful:
His promises were, as he then was, mighty;
But his performance, as he is now, nothing:
Of his own body he was ill, and gave
The clergy in example.
Noble madam,
Mens evil manners live in brass; their virtues
We write in water. May it please your highness
To hear me speak his good now?
Yes, good Griffith;
I were malicious else.
This cardinal,
Though from an humble stock, undoubtedly
Was fashiond to much honour from his cradle.
He was a scholar, and a ripe and good one;
Exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading:
Lofty and sour to them that loved him not;
But to those men that sought him sweet as summer.
And though he were unsatisfied in getting,
Which was a sin, yet in bestowing, madam,
He was most princely: ever witness for him
Those twins Of learning that he raised in you,
Ipswich and Oxford! one of which fell with him,
Unwilling to outlive the good that did it;
The other, though unfinishd, yet so famous,
So excellent in art, and still so rising,
That Christendom shall ever speak his virtue.
His overthrow heapd happiness upon him;
For then, and not till then, he felt himself,
And found the blessedness of being little:
And, to add greater honours to his age
Than man could give him, he died fearing God.
After my death I wish no other herald,
No other speaker of my living actions,
To keep mine honour from corruption,
But such an honest chronicler as Griffith.
Whom I most hated living, thou hast made me,
With thy religious truth and modesty,
Now in his ashes honour: peace be with him!
Patience, be near me still; and set me lower:
I have not long to trouble thee. Good Griffith,
Cause the musicians play me that sad note
I named my knell, whilst I sit meditating
On that celestial harmony I go to.
Sad and solemn music
She is asleep: good wench, lets sit down quiet,
For fear we wake her: softly, gentle Patience.
The vision. Enter, solemnly tripping one after  another, six personages, clad in white robes,  wearing on their heads garlands of bays, and golden  vizards on their faces; branches of bays or palm in  their hands. They first congee unto her, then  dance; and, at certain changes, the first two hold  a spare garland over her head; at which the other  four make reverent curtsies; then the two that held  the garland deliver the same to the other next two,  who observe the same order in their changes, and  holding the garland over her head: which done,  they deliver the same garland to the last two, who  likewise observe the same order: at which, as it  were by inspiration, she makes in her sleep signs  of rejoicing, and holdeth up her hands to heaven:  and so in their dancing vanish, carrying the garland with them. The music continues
Spirits of peace, where are ye? are ye all gone,
And leave me here in wretchedness behind ye?
Madam, we are here.
It is not you I call for:
Saw ye none enter since I slept?
None, madam.
No? Saw you not, even now, a blessed troop
Invite me to a banquet; whose bright faces
Cast thousand beams upon me, like the sun?
They promised me eternal happiness;
And brought me garlands, Griffith, which I feel
I am not worthy yet to wear: I shall, assuredly.
I am most joyful, madam, such good dreams
Possess your fancy.
Bid the music leave,
They are harsh and heavy to me.
Music ceases
Do you note
How much her grace is alterd on the sudden?
How long her face is drawn? how pale she looks,
And of an earthy cold? Mark her eyes!
She is going, wench: pray, pray.
Heaven comfort her!
Enter a Messenger
Ant like your grace,--
You are a saucy fellow:
Deserve we no more reverence?
You are to blame,
Knowing she will not lose her wonted greatness,
To use so rude behavior; go to, kneel.
I humbly do entreat your highness pardon;
My haste made me unmannerly. There is staying
A gentleman, sent from the king, to see you.
Admit him entrance, Griffith: but this fellow
Let me neer see again.
Exeunt GRIFFITH and Messenger
Re-enter GRIFFITH, with CAPUCIUS
If my sight fail not,
You should be lord ambassador from the emperor,
My royal nephew, and your name Capucius.
Madam, the same; your servant.
O, my lord,
The times and titles now are alterd strangely
With me since first you knew me. But, I pray you,
What is your pleasure with me?
Noble lady,
First mine own service to your grace; the next,
The kings request that I would visit you;
Who grieves much for your weakness, and by me
Sends you his princely commendations,
And heartily entreats you take good comfort.
O my good lord, that comfort comes too late;
Tis like a pardon after execution:
That gentle physic, given in time, had cured me;
But now I am past an comforts here, but prayers.
How does his highness?
Madam, in good health.
So may he ever do! and ever flourish,
When I shal l dwell with worms, and my poor name
Banishd the kingdom! Patience, is that letter,
I caused you write, yet sent away?
No, madam.
Giving it to KATHARINE
Sir, I most humbly pray you to deliver
This to my lord the king.
Most willing, madam.
In which I have commended to his goodness
The model of our chaste loves, his young daughter;
The dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her!
Beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding--
She is young, and of a noble modest nature,
I hope she will deserve well,--and a little
To love her for her mothers sake, that loved him,
Heaven knows how dearly. My next poor petition
Is, that his noble grace would have some pity
Upon my wretched women, that so long
Have followd both my fortunes faithfully:
Of which there is not one, I dare avow,
And now I should not lie, but will deserve
For virtue and true beauty of the soul,
For honesty and decent carriage,
A right good husband, let him be a noble
And, sure, those men are happy that shall have em.
The last is, for my men; they are the poorest,
But poverty could never draw em from me;
That they may have their wages duly paid em,
And something over to remember me by:
If heaven had pleased to have given me longer life
And able means, we had not parted thus.
These are the whole contents: and, good my lord,
By that you love the dearest in this world,
As you wish Christian peace to souls departed,
Stand these poor peoples friend, and urge the king
To do me this last right.
By heaven, I will,
Or let me lose the fashion of a man!
I thank you, honest lord. Remember me
In all humility unto his highness:
Say his long trouble now is passing
Out of this world; tell him, in death I blessd him,
For so I will. Mine eyes grow dim. Farewell,
My lord. Griffith, farewell. Nay, Patience,
You must not leave me yet: I must to bed;
Call in more women. When I am dead, good wench,
Let me be used with honour: strew me over
With maiden flowers, that all the world may know
I was a chaste wife to my grave: embalm me,
Then lay me forth: although unqueend, yet like
A queen, and daughter to a king, inter me.
I can no more.
Exeunt, leading KATHARINE
ACT V
SCENE I. London. A gallery in the palace.
Enter GARDINER, Bishop of Winchester, a Page with a torch before him, met by LOVELL
Its one oclock, boy, ist not?
It hath struck.
These should be hours for necessities,
Not for delights; times to repair our nature
With comforting repose, and not for us
To waste these times. Good hour of night, Sir Thomas!
Whither so late?
Came you from the king, my lord
I did, Sir Thomas: and left him at primero
With the Duke of Suffolk.
I must to him too,
Before he go to bed. Ill take my leave.
Not yet, Sir Thomas Lovell. Whats the matter?
It seems you are in haste: an if there be
No great offence belongs tot, give your friend
Some touch of your late business: affairs, that walk,
As they say spirits do, at midnight, have
In them a wilder nature than the business
That seeks dispatch by day.
My lord, I love you;
And durst commend a secret to your ear
Much weightier than this work. The queens in labour,
They say, in great extremity; and feard
Shell with the labour end.
The fruit she goes with
I pray for heartily, that it may find
Good time, and live: but for the stock, Sir Thomas,
I wish it grubbd up now.
Methinks I could
Cry the amen; and yet my conscience says
Shes a good creature, and, sweet lady, does
Deserve our better wishes.
But, sir, sir,
Hear me, Sir Thomas: youre a gentleman
Of mine own way; I know you wise, religious;
And, let me tell you, it will neer be well,
Twill not, Sir Thomas Lovell, taket of me,
Till Cranmer, Cromwell, her two hands, and she,
Sleep in their graves.
Now, sir, you speak of two
The most remarkd i the kingdom. As for Cromwell,
Beside that of the jewel house, is made master
O the rolls, and the kings secretary; further, sir,
Stands in the gap and trade of moe preferments,
With which the time will load him. The archbishop
Is the kings hand and tongue; and who dare speak
One syllable against him?
Yes, yes, Sir Thomas,
There are that dare; and I myself have ventured
To speak my mind of him: and indeed this day,
Sir, I may tell it you, I think I have
Incensed the lords o the council, that he is,
For so I know he is, they know he is,
A most arch heretic, a pestilence
That does infect the land: with which they moved
Have broken with the king; who hath so far
Given ear to our complaint, of his great grace
And princely care foreseeing those fell mischiefs
Our reasons laid before him, hath commanded
To-morrow morning to the council-board
He be convented. Hes a rank weed, Sir Thomas,
And we must root him out. From your affairs
I hinder you too long: good night, Sir Thomas.
Many good nights, my lord: I rest your servant.
Exeunt GARDINER and Page
Enter KING HENRY VIII and SUFFOLK
Charles, I will play no more tonight;
My minds not ont; you are too hard for me.
Sir, I did never win of you before.
But little, Charles;
Nor shall not, when my fancys on my play.
Now, Lovell, from the queen what is the news?
I could not personally deliver to her
What you commanded me, but by her woman
I sent your message; who returnd her thanks
In the greatst humbleness, and desired your highness
Most heartily to pray for her.
What sayst thou, ha?
To pray for her? what, is she crying out?
So said her woman; and that her sufferance made
Almost each pang a death.
Alas, good lady!
God safely quit her of her burthen, and
With gentle travail, to the gladding of
Your highness with an heir!
Tis midnight, Charles;
Prithee, to bed; and in thy prayers remember
The estate of my poor queen. Leave me alone;
For I must think of that which company
Would not be friendly to.
I wish your highness
A quiet night; and my good mistress will
Remember in my prayers.
Charles, good night.
Exit SUFFOLK
Enter DENNY
Well, sir, what follows?
Sir, I have brought my lord the archbishop,
As you commanded me.
Ha! Canterbury?
Ay, my good lord.
Tis true: where is he, Denny?
He attends your highness pleasure.
Exit DENNY
[Aside]  This is about that which the bishop spake:
I am happily come hither.
Re-enter DENNY, with CRANMER
Avoid the gallery.
LOVELL seems to stay
Ha! I have said. Be gone. What!
Exeunt LOVELL and DENNY
[Aside]
I am fearful: wherefore frowns he thus?
Tis his aspect of terror. Alls not well.
How now, my lord! you desire to know
Wherefore I sent for you.
[Kneeling]              It is my duty
To attend your highness pleasure.
Pray you, arise,
My good and gracious Lord of Canterbury.
Come, you and I must walk a turn together;
I have news to tell you: come, come, give me your hand.
Ah, my good lord, I grieve at what I speak,
And am right sorry to repeat what follows
I have, and most unwillingly, of late
Heard many grievous, I do say, my lord,
Grievous complaints of you; which, being considerd,
Have moved us and our council, that you shall
This morning come before us; where, I know,
You cannot with such freedom purge yourself,
But that, till further trial in those charges
Which will require your answer, you must take
Your patience to you, and be well contented
To make your house our Tower: you a brother of us,
It fits we thus proceed, or else no witness
Would come against you.
[Kneeling]
I humbly thank your highness;
And am right glad to catch this good occasion
Most throughly to be winnowd, where my chaff
And corn shall fly asunder: for, I know,
Theres none stands under more calumnious tongues
Than I myself, poor man.
Stand up, good Canterbury:
Thy truth and thy integrity is rooted
In us, thy friend: give me thy hand, stand up:
Prithee, lets walk. Now, by my holidame.
What manner of man are you? My lord, I lookd
You would have given me your petition, that
I should have taen some pains to bring together
Yourself and your accusers; and to have heard you,
Without indurance, further.
Most dread liege,
The good I stand on is my truth and honesty:
If they shall fail, I, with mine enemies,
Will triumph oer my person; which I weigh not,
Being of those virtues vacant. I fear nothing
What can be said against me.
Know you not
How your state stands i the world, with the whole world?
Your enemies are many, and not small; their practises
Must bear the same proportion; and not ever
The justice and the truth o the question carries
The due o the verdict with it: at what ease
Might corrupt minds procure knaves as corrupt
To swear against you? such things have been done.
You are potently opposed; and with a malice
Of as great size. Ween you of better luck,
I mean, in perjured witness, than your master,
Whose minister you are, whiles here he lived
Upon this naughty earth? Go to, go to;
You take a precipice for no leap of danger,
And woo your own destruction.
God and your majesty
Protect mine innocence, or I fall into
The trap is laid for me!
Be of good cheer;
They shall no more prevail than we give way to.
Keep comfort to you; and this morning see
You do appear before them: if they shall chance,
In charging you with matters, to commit you,
The best persuasions to the contrary
Fail not to use, and with what vehemency
The occasion shall instruct you: if entreaties
Will render you no remedy, this ring
Deliver them, and your appeal to us
There make before them. Look, the good man weeps!
Hes honest, on mine honour. Gods blest mother!
I swear he is true--hearted; and a soul
None better in my kingdom. Get you gone,
And do as I have bid you.
Exit CRANMER
He has strangled
His language in his tears.
Enter Old Lady, LOVELL following
[Within]                 Come back: what mean you?
Ill not come back; the tidings that I bring
Will make my boldness manners. Now, good angels
Fly oer thy royal head, and shade thy person
Under their blessed wings!
Now, by thy looks
