I guess thy message. Is the queen deliverd?
Say, ay; and of a boy.
Ay, ay, my liege;
And of a lovely boy: the God of heaven
Both now and ever bless her! tis a girl,
Promises boys hereafter. Sir, your queen
Desires your visitation, and to be
Acquainted with this stranger tis as like you
As cherry is to cherry.
Lovell!
Sir?
Give her an hundred marks. Ill to the queen.
Exit
An hundred marks! By this light, Ill ha more.
An ordinary groom is for such payment.
I will have more, or scold it out of him.
Said I for this, the girl was like to him?
I will have more, or else unsayt; and now,
While it is hot, Ill put it to the issue.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Before the council-chamber. Pursuivants, Pages,  and c.
attending.
Enter CRANMER
I hope I am not too late; and yet the gentleman,
That was sent to me from the council, prayd me
To make great haste. All fast? what means this? Ho!
Who waits there? Sure, you know me?
Enter Keeper
Yes, my lord;
But yet I cannot help you.
Why?
Enter DOCTOR BUTTS
Your grace must wait till you be calld for.
So.
[Aside]  This is a piece of malice. I am glad
I came this way so happily: the king
Shall understand it presently.
Exit
[Aside]Tis Butts,
The kings physician: as he passd along,
How earnestly he cast his eyes upon me!
Pray heaven, he sound not my disgrace! For certain,
This is of purpose laid by some that hate me--
God turn their hearts! I never sought their malice--
To quench mine honour: they would shame to make me
Wait else at door, a fellow-counsellor,
Mong boys, grooms, and lackeys. But their pleasures
Must be fulfilld, and I attend with patience.
Enter the KING HENRY VIII and DOCTOR BUTTS at a window above
Ill show your grace the strangest sight--
Whats that, Butts?
I think your highness saw this many a day.
Body o me, where is it?
There, my lord:
The high promotion of his grace of Canterbury;
Who holds his state at door, mongst pursuivants,
Pages, and footboys.
Ha! tis he, indeed:
Is this the honour they do one another?
Tis well theres one above em yet. I had thought
They had parted so much honesty among em
At least, good manners, as not thus to suffer
A man of his place, and so near our favour,
To dance attendance on their lordships pleasures,
And at the door too, like a post with packets.
By holy Mary, Butts, theres knavery:
Let em alone, and draw the curtain close:
We shall hear more anon.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The Council-Chamber.
Enter Chancellor; places himself at the upper end  of the table on the left hand; a seat being left  void above him, as for CRANMERs seat. SUFFOLK,  NORFOLK, SURREY, Chamberlain, GARDINER, seat  themselves in order on each side. CROMWELL at lower end, as secretary. Keeper at the door
Speak to the business, master-secretary:
Why are we met in council?
Please your honours,
The chief cause concerns his grace of Canterbury.
Has he had knowledge of it?
Yes.
Who waits there?
Without, my noble lords?
Yes.
My lord archbishop;
And has done half an hour, to know your pleasures.
Let him come in.
Your grace may enter now.
CRANMER enters and approaches the council-table
My good lord archbishop, Im very sorry
To sit here at this present, and behold
That chair stand empty: but we all are men,
In our own natures frail, and capable
Of our flesh; few are angels: out of which frailty
And want of wisdom, you, that best should teach us,
Have misdemeand yourself, and not a little,
Toward the king first, then his laws, in filling
The whole realm, by your teaching and your chaplains,
For so we are informd, with new opinions,
Divers and dangerous; which are heresies,
And, not reformd, may prove pernicious.
Which reformation must be sudden too,
My noble lords; for those that tame wild horses
Pace em not in their hands to make em gentle,
But stop their mouths with stubborn bits, and spur em,
Till they obey the manage. If we suffer,
Out of our easiness and childish pity
To one mans honour, this contagious sickness,
Farewell all physic: and what follows then?
Commotions, uproars, with a general taint
Of the whole state: as, of late days, our neighbours,
The upper Germany, can dearly witness,
Yet freshly pitied in our memories.
My good lords, hitherto, in all the progress
Both of my life and office, I have labourd,
And with no little study, that my teaching
And the strong course of my authority
Might go one way, and safely; and the end
Was ever, to do well: nor is there living,
I speak it with a single heart, my lords,
A man that more detests, more stirs against,
Both in his private conscience and his place,
Defacers of a public peace, than I do.
Pray heaven, the king may never find a heart
With less allegiance in it! Men that make
Envy and crooked malice nourishment
Dare bite the best. I do beseech your lordships,
That, in this case of justice, my accusers,
Be what they will, may stand forth face to face,
And freely urge against me.
Nay, my lord,
That cannot be: you are a counsellor,
And, by that virtue, no man dare accuse you.
My lord, because we have business of more moment,
We will be short with you. Tis his highness pleasure,
And our consent, for better trial of you,
From hence you be committed to the Tower;
Where, being but a private man again,
You shall know many dare accuse you boldly,
More than, I fear, you are provided for.
Ah, my good Lord of Winchester, I thank you;
You are always my good friend; if your will pass,
I shall both find your lordship judge and juror,
You are so merciful: I see your end;
Tis my undoing: love and meekness, lord,
Become a churchman better than ambition:
Win straying souls with modesty again,
Cast none away. That I shall clear myself,
Lay all the weight ye can upon my patience,
I make as little doubt, as you do conscience
In doing daily wrongs. I could say more,
But reverence to your calling makes me modest.
My lord, my lord, you are a sectary,
Thats the plain truth: your painted gloss discovers,
To men that understand you, words and weakness.
My Lord of Winchester, you are a little,
By your good favour, too sharp; men so noble,
However faulty, yet should find respect
For what they have been: tis a cruelty
To load a falling man.
Good master secretary,
I cry your honour mercy; you may, worst
Of all this table, say so.
Why, my lord?
Do not I know you for a favourer
Of this new sect? ye are not sound.
Not sound?
Not sound, I say.
Would you were half so honest!
Mens prayers then would seek you, not their fears.
I shall remember this bold language.
Do.
Remember your bold life too.
This is too much;
Forbear, for shame, my lords.
I have done.
And I.
Then thus for you, my lord: it stands agreed,
I take it, by all voices, that forthwith
You be conveyd to the Tower a prisoner;
There to remain till the kings further pleasure
Be known unto us: are you all agreed, lords?
We are.
Is there no other way of mercy,
But I must needs to the Tower, my lords?
What other
Would you expect? you are strangely troublesome.
Let some o the guard be ready there.
Enter Guard
For me?
Must I go like a traitor thither?
Receive him,
And see him safe i the Tower.
Stay, good my lords,
I have a little yet to say. Look there, my lords;
By virtue of that ring, I take my cause
Out of the gripes of cruel men, and give it
To a most noble judge, the king my master.
This is the kings ring.
Tis no counterfeit.
Tis the right ring, by heaven: I told ye all,
When ye first put this dangerous stone a-rolling,
Twould fall upon ourselves.
Do you think, my lords,
The king will suffer but the little finger
Of this man to be vexd?
Tis now too certain:
How much more is his life in value with him?
Would I were fairly out ont!
My mind gave me,
In seeking tales and informations
Against this man, whose honesty the devil
And his disciples only envy at,
Ye blew the fire that burns ye: now have at ye!
Enter KING, frowning on them; takes his seat
Dread sovereign, how much are we bound to heaven
In daily thanks, that gave us such a prince;
Not only good and wise, but most religious:
One that, in all obedience, makes the church
The chief aim of his honour; and, to strengthen
That holy duty, out of dear respect,
His royal self in judgment comes to hear
The cause betwixt her and this great offender.
You were ever good at sudden commendations,
Bishop of Winchester. But know, I come not
To hear such flattery now, and in my presence;
They are too thin and bare to hide offences.
To me you cannot reach, you play the spaniel,
And think with wagging of your tongue to win me;
But, whatsoeer thou takest me for, Im sure
Thou hast a cruel nature and a bloody.
To CRANMER
Good man, sit down. Now let me see the proudest
He, that dares most, but wag his finger at thee:
By all thats holy, he had better starve
Than but once think this place becomes thee not.
May it please your grace,--
No, sir, it does not please me.
I had thought I had had men of some understanding
And wisdom of my council; but I find none.
Was it discretion, lords, to let this man,
This good man,--few of you deserve that title,--
This honest man, wait like a lousy footboy
At chamber--door? and one as great as you are?
Why, what a shame was this! Did my commission
Bid ye so far forget yourselves? I gave ye
Power as he was a counsellor to try him,
Not as a groom: theres some of ye, I see,
More out of malice than integrity,
Would try him to the utmost, had ye mean;
Which ye shall never have while I live.
Thus far,
My most dread sovereign, may it like your grace
To let my tongue excuse all. What was purposed
Concerning his imprisonment, was rather,
If there be faith in men, meant for his trial,
And fair purgation to the world, than malice,
Im sure, in me.
Well, well, my lords, respect him;
Take him, and use him well, hes worthy of it.
I will say thus much for him, if a prince
May be beholding to a subject, I
Am, for his love and service, so to him.
Make me no more ado, but all embrace him:
Be friends, for shame, my lords! My Lord of
Canterbury,
I have a suit which you must not deny me;
That is, a fair young maid that yet wants baptism,
You must be godfather, and answer for her.
The greatest monarch now alive may glory
In such an honour: how may I deserve it
That am a poor and humble subject to you?
Come, come, my lord, yould spare your spoons: you
shall have two noble partners with you; the old
Duchess of Norfolk, and Lady Marquess Dorset: will
these please you?
Once more, my Lord of Winchester, I charge you,
Embrace and love this man.
With a true heart
And brother-love I do it.
And let heaven
Witness, how dear I hold this confirmation.
Good man, those joyful tears show thy true heart:
The common voice, I see, is verified
Of thee, which says thus, Do my Lord of Canterbury
A shrewd turn, and he is your friend for ever.
Come, lords, we trifle time away; I long
To have this young one made a Christian.
As I have made ye one, lords, one remain;
So I grow stronger, you more honour gain.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The palace yard.
Noise and tumult within. Enter Porter and his Man
Youll leave your noise anon, ye rascals: do you
take the court for Paris-garden? ye rude slaves,
leave your gaping.
Within
Good master porter, I belong to the larder.
Belong to the gallows, and be hanged, ye rogue! is
this a place to roar in? Fetch me a dozen crab-tree
staves, and strong ones: these are but switches to
em. Ill scratch your heads: you must be seeing
christenings? do you look for ale and cakes here,
you rude rascals?
Pray, sir, be patient: tis as much impossible--
Unless we sweep em from the door with cannons--
To scatter em, as tis to make em sleep
On May-day morning; which will never be:
We may as well push against Powles, as stir em.
How got they in, and be hangd?
Alas, I know not; how gets the tide in?
As much as one sound cudgel of four foot--
You see the poor remainder--could distribute,
I made no spare, sir.
You did nothing, sir.
I am not Samson, nor Sir Guy, nor Colbrand,
To mow em down before me: but if I spared any
That had a head to hit, either young or old,
He or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker,
Let me neer hope to see a chine again
And that I would not for a cow, God save her!
Within
Do you hear, master porter?
I shall be with you presently, good master puppy.
Keep the door close, sirrah.
What would you have me do?
What should you do, but knock em down by the
dozens? Is this Moorfields to muster in? or have
we some strange Indian with the great tool come to
court, the women so besiege us? Bless me, what a
fry of fornication is at door! On my Christian
conscience, this one christening will beget a
thousand; here will be father, godfather, and all together.
The spoons will be the bigger, sir. There is a
fellow somewhat near the door, he should be a
brazier by his face, for, o my conscience, twenty
of the dog-days now reign ins nose; all that stand
about him are under the line, they need no other
penance: that fire-drake did I hit three times on
the head, and three times was his nose discharged
against me; he stands there, like a mortar-piece, to
blow us. There was a haberdashers wife of small
wit near him, that railed upon me till her pinked
porringer fell off her head, for kindling such a
combustion in the state. I missed the meteor once,
and hit that woman; who cried out Clubs! when I
might see from far some forty truncheoners draw to
her succor, which were the hope o the Strand, where
she was quartered. They fell on; I made good my
place: at length they came to the broom-staff to
me; I defied em still: when suddenly a file of
boys behind em, loose shot, delivered such a shower
of pebbles, that I was fain to draw mine honour in,
and let em win the work: the devil was amongst
em, I think, surely.
These are the youths that thunder at a playhouse,
and fight for bitten apples; that no audience, but
the tribulation of Tower-hill, or the limbs of
Limehouse, their dear brothers, are able to endure.
I have some of em in Limbo Patrum, and there they
are like to dance these three days; besides the
running banquet of two beadles that is to come.
Enter Chamberlain
Mercy o me, what a multitude are here!
They grow still too; from all parts they are coming,
As if we kept a fair here! Where are these porters,
These lazy knaves? Ye have made a fine hand, fellows:
Theres a trim rabble let in: are all these
Your faithful friends o the suburbs? We shall have
Great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies,
When they pass back from the christening.
Ant please
your honour,
We are but men; and what so many may do,
Not being torn a-pieces, we have done:
An army cannot rule em.
As I live,
If the king blame me fort, Ill lay ye all
By the heels, and suddenly; and on your heads
Clap round fines for neglect: ye are lazy knaves;
And here ye lie baiting of bombards, when
Ye should do service. Hark! the trumpets sound;
Theyre come already from the christening:
Go, break among the press, and find a way out
To let the troop pass fairly; or Ill find
A Marshalsea shall hold ye play these two months.
Make way there for the princess.
You great fellow,
Stand close up, or Ill make your head ache.
You i the camlet, get up o the rail;
Ill peck you oer the pales else.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The palace.
Enter trumpets, sounding; then two Aldermen, Lord  Mayor, Garter, CRANMER, NORFOLK with his marshals  staff, SUFFOLK, two Noblemen bearing great  standing-bowls for the christening-gifts; then  four Noblemen bearing a canopy, under which the  Duchess of Norfolk, godmother, bearing the child  richly habited in a mantle,  and c., train borne by a  Lady; then follows the Marchioness Dorset, the  other godmother, and Ladies. The troop pass once about the stage, and Garter speaks
Heaven, from thy endless goodness, send prosperous
life, long, and ever happy, to the high and mighty
princess of England, Elizabeth!
Flourish. Enter KING HENRY VIII and Guard
[Kneeling] And to your royal grace, and the good queen,
My noble partners, and myself, thus pray:
All comfort, joy, in this most gracious lady,
Heaven ever laid up to make parents happy,
May hourly fall upon ye!
Thank you, good lord archbishop:
What is her name?
Elizabeth.
Stand up, lord.
KING HENRY VIII kisses the child
With this kiss take my blessing: God protect thee!
Into whose hand I give thy life.
Amen.
My noble gossips, ye have been too prodigal:
I thank ye heartily; so shall this lady,
When she has so much English.
Let me speak, sir,
For heaven now bids me; and the words I utter
Let none think flattery, for theyll find em truth.
This royal infant--heaven still move about her!--
Though in her cradle, yet now promises
Upon this land a thousand thousand blessings,
Which time shall bring to ripeness: she shall be--
But few now living can behold that goodness--
A pattern to all princes living with her,
And all that shall succeed: Saba was never
More covetous of wisdom and fair virtue
Than this pure soul shall be: all princely graces,
That mould up such a mighty piece as this is,
With all the virtues that attend the good,
Shall still be doubled on her: truth shall nurse her,
Holy and heavenly thoughts still counsel her:
She shall be loved and feard: her own shall bless her;
Her foes shake like a field of beaten corn,
And hang their heads with sorrow: good grows with her:
In her days every man shall eat in safety,
Under his own vine, what he plants; and sing
The merry songs of peace to all his neighbours:
God shall be truly known; and those about her
From her shall read the perfect ways of honour,
And by those claim their greatness, not by blood.
Nor shall this peace sleep with her: but as when
The bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix,
Her ashes new create another heir,
As great in admiration as herself;
So shall she leave her blessedness to one,
When heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness,
Who from the sacred ashes of her honour
Shall star-like rise, as great in fame as she was,
And so stand fixd: peace, plenty, love, truth, terror,
That were the servants to this chosen infant,
Shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him:
Wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine,
His honour and the greatness of his name
Shall be, and make new nations: he shall flourish,
And, like a mountain cedar, reach his branches
To all the plains about him: our childrens children
Shall see this, and bless heaven.
Thou speakest wonders.
She shall be, to the happiness of England,
An aged princess; many days shall see her,
And yet no day without a deed to crown it.
Would I had known no more! but she must die,
She must, the saints must have her; yet a virgin,
A most unspotted lily shall she pass
To the ground, and all the world shall mourn her.
O lord archbishop,
Thou hast made me now a man! never, before
This happy child, did I get any thing:
This oracle of comfort has so pleased me,
That when I am in heaven I shall desire
To see what this child does, and praise my Maker.
I thank ye all. To you, my good lord mayor,
And your good brethren, I am much beholding;
I have received much honour by your presence,
And ye shall find me thankful. Lead the way, lords:
Ye must all see the queen, and she must thank ye,
She will be sick else. This day, no man think
Has business at his house; for all shall stay:
This little one shall make it holiday.
Exeunt
EPILOGUE
Tis ten to one this play can never please
All that are here: some come to take their ease,
And sleep an act or two; but those, we fear,
We have frighted with our trumpets; so, tis clear,
Theyll say tis naught: others, to hear the city
Abused extremely, and to cry Thats witty!
Which we have not done neither: that, I fear,
All the expected good were like to hear
For this play at this time, is only in
The merciful construction of good women;
For such a one we showd em: if they smile,
And say twill do, I know, within a while
All the best men are ours; for tis ill hap,
If they hold when their ladies bid em clap.
ACT I
SCENE I. KING JOHNS palace.
Enter KING JOHN, QUEEN ELINOR, PEMBROKE, ESSEX, SALISBURY, and others, with CHATILLON
Now, say, Chatillon, what would France with us?
Thus, after greeting, speaks the King of France
In my behavior to the majesty,
The borrowd majesty, of England here.
A strange beginning: borrowd majesty!
Silence, good mother; hear the embassy.
Philip of France, in right and true behalf
Of thy deceased brother Geffreys son,
Arthur Plantagenet, lays most lawful claim
To this fair island and the territories,
To Ireland, Poictiers, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
Desiring thee to lay aside the sword
Which sways usurpingly these several titles,
And put these same into young Arthurs hand,
Thy nephew and right royal sovereign.
What follows if we disallow of this?
The proud control of fierce and bloody war,
To enforce these rights so forcibly withheld.
Here have we war for war and blood for blood,
Controlment for controlment: so answer France.
Then take my kings defiance from my mouth,
The farthest limit of my embassy.
Bear mine to him, and so depart in peace:
Be thou as lightning in the eyes of France;
For ere thou canst report I will be there,
The thunder of my cannon shall be heard:
So hence! Be thou the trumpet of our wrath
And sullen presage of your own decay.
An honourable conduct let him have:
Pembroke, look to t. Farewell, Chatillon.
Exeunt CHATILLON and PEMBROKE
What now, my son! have I not ever said
How that ambitious Constance would not cease
Till she had kindled France and all the world,
Upon the right and party of her son?
This might have been prevented and made whole
With very easy arguments of love,
Which now the manage of two kingdoms must
With fearful bloody issue arbitrate.
Our strong possession and our right for us.
Your strong possession much more than your right,
Or else it must go wrong with you and me:
So much my conscience whispers in your ear,
Which none but heaven and you and I shall hear.
Enter a Sheriff
My liege, here is the strangest controversy
Come from country to be judged by you,
That eer I heard: shall I produce the men?
Let them approach.
Our abbeys and our priories shall pay
This expeditions charge.
Enter ROBERT and the BASTARD
What men are you?
Your faithful subject I, a gentleman
Born in Northamptonshire and eldest son,
As I suppose, to Robert Faulconbridge,
A soldier, by the honour-giving hand
Of Coeur-de-lion knighted in the field.
What art thou?
The son and heir to that same Faulconbridge.
Is that the elder, and art thou the heir?
You came not of one mother then, it seems.
Most certain of one mother, mighty king;
That is well known; and, as I think, one father:
But for the certain knowledge of that truth
I put you oer to heaven and to my mother:
Of that I doubt, as all mens children may.
Out on thee, rude man! thou dost shame thy mother
And wound her honour with this diffidence.
I, madam? no, I have no reason for it;
That is my brothers plea and none of mine;
The which if he can prove, a pops me out
At least from fair five hundred pound a year:
Heaven guard my mothers honour and my land!
A good blunt fellow. Why, being younger born,
Doth he lay claim to thine inheritance?
I know not why, except to get the land.
But once he slanderd me with bastardy:
But whether I be as true begot or no,
That still I lay upon my mothers head,
But that I am as well begot, my liege,--
Fair fall the bones that took the pains for me!--
Compare our faces and be judge yourself.
If old sir Robert did beget us both
And were our father and this son like him,
O old sir Robert, father, on my knee
I give heaven thanks I was not like to thee!
Why, what a madcap hath heaven lent us here!
He hath a trick of Coeur-de-lions face;
The accent of his tongue affecteth him.
Do you not read some tokens of my son
In the large composition of this man?
Mine eye hath well examined his parts
And finds them perfect Richard. Sirrah, speak,
What doth move you to claim your brothers land?
Because he hath a half-face, like my father.
With half that face would he have all my land:
A half-faced groat five hundred pound a year!
My gracious liege, when that my father lived,
Your brother did employ my father much,--
Well, sir, by this you cannot get my land:
Your tale must be how he employd my mother.
And once dispatchd him in an embassy
To Germany, there with the emperor
To treat of high affairs touching that time.
The advantage of his absence took the king
And in the mean time sojournd at my fathers;
Where how he did prevail I shame to speak,
But truth is truth: large lengths of seas and shores
Between my father and my mother lay,
As I have heard my father speak himself,
When this same lusty gentleman was got.
Upon his death-bed he by will bequeathd
His lands to me, and took it on his death
That this my mothers son was none of his;
And if he were, he came into the world
Full fourteen weeks before the course of time.
Then, good my liege, let me have what is mine,
My fathers land, as was my fathers will.
Sirrah, your brother is legitimate;
Your fathers wife did after wedlock bear him,
And if she did play false, the fault was hers;
Which fault lies on the hazards of all husbands
That marry wives. Tell me, how if my brother,
Who, as you say, took pains to get this son,
Had of your father claimd this son for his?
In sooth, good friend, your father might have kept
This calf bred from his cow from all the world;
In sooth he might; then, if he were my brothers,
My brother might not claim him; nor your father,
Being none of his, refuse him: this concludes;
My mothers son did get your fathers heir;
Your fathers heir must have your fathers land.
Shall then my fathers will be of no force
To dispossess that child which is not his?
Of no more force to dispossess me, sir,
Than was his will to get me, as I think.
Whether hadst thou rather be a Faulconbridge
And like thy brother, to enjoy thy land,
Or the reputed son of Coeur-de-lion,
Lord of thy presence and no land beside?
Madam, an if my brother had my shape,
And I had his, sir Roberts his, like him;
And if my legs were two such riding-rods,
My arms such eel-skins stuffd, my face so thin
That in mine ear I durst not stick a rose
Lest men should say Look, where three-farthings goes!
And, to his shape, were heir to all this land,
Would I might never stir from off this place,
I would give it every foot to have this face;
I would not be sir Nob in any case.
I like thee well: wilt thou forsake thy fortune,
Bequeath thy land to him and follow me?
I am a soldier and now bound to France.
Brother, take you my land, Ill take my chance.
Your face hath got five hundred pound a year,
Yet sell your face for five pence and tis dear.
Madam, Ill follow you unto the death.
Nay, I would have you go before me thither.
Our country manners give our betters way.
What is thy name?
Philip, my liege, so is my name begun,
Philip, good old sir Roberts wifes eldest son.
From henceforth bear his name whose form thou bearst:
Kneel thou down Philip, but rise more great,
Arise sir Richard and Plantagenet.
Brother by the mothers side, give me your hand:
My father gave me honour, yours gave land.
Now blessed by the hour, by night or day,
When I was got, sir Robert was away!
The very spirit of Plantagenet!
I am thy grandam, Richard; call me so.
Madam, by chance but not by truth; what though?
Something about, a little from the right,
In at the window, or else oer the hatch:
Who dares not stir by day must walk by night,
And have is have, however men do catch:
Near or far off, well won is still well shot,
And I am I, howeer I was begot.
Go, Faulconbridge: now hast thou thy desire;
A landless knight makes thee a landed squire.
Come, madam, and come, Richard, we must speed
For France, for France, for it is more than need.
Brother, adieu: good fortune come to thee!
For thou wast got i the way of honesty.
Exeunt all but BASTARD
A foot of honour better than I was;
But many a many foot of land the worse.
Well, now can I make any Joan a lady.
Good den, sir Richard!--God-a-mercy, fellow!--
And if his name be George, Ill call him Peter;
For new-made honour doth forget mens names;
Tis too respective and too sociable
For your conversion. Now your traveller,
He and his toothpick at my worships mess,
And when my knightly stomach is sufficed,
Why then I suck my teeth and catechise
My picked man of countries: My dear sir,
Thus, leaning on mine elbow, I begin,
I shall beseech you--that is question now;
And then comes answer like an Absey book:
O sir, says answer, at your best command;
At your employment; at your service, sir;
No, sir, says question, I, sweet sir, at yours:
And so, ere answer knows what question would,
Saving in dialogue of compliment,
And talking of the Alps and Apennines,
The Pyrenean and the river Po,
It draws toward supper in conclusion so.
But this is worshipful society
And fits the mounting spirit like myself,
For he is but a bastard to the time
That doth not smack of observation;
And so am I, whether I smack or no;
And not alone in habit and device,
Exterior form, outward accoutrement,
But from the inward motion to deliver
Sweet, sweet, sweet poison for the ages tooth:
Which, though I will not practise to deceive,
Yet, to avoid deceit, I mean to learn;
For it shall strew the footsteps of my rising.
But who comes in such haste in riding-robes?
What woman-post is this? hath she no husband
That will take pains to blow a horn before her?
Enter LADY FAULCONBRIDGE and GURNEY
O me! it is my mother. How now, good lady!
What brings you here to court so hastily?
Where is that slave, thy brother? where is he,
That holds in chase mine honour up and down?
My brother Robert? old sir Roberts son?
Colbrand the giant, that same mighty man?
Is it sir Roberts son that you seek so?
Sir Roberts son! Ay, thou unreverend boy,
Sir Roberts son: why scornst thou at sir Robert?
He is sir Roberts son, and so art thou.
James Gurney, wilt thou give us leave awhile?
Good leave, good Philip.
Philip! sparrow: James,
Theres toys abroad: anon Ill tell thee more.
Exit GURNEY
Madam, I was not old sir Roberts son:
Sir Robert might have eat his part in me
Upon Good-Friday and neer broke his fast:
Sir Robert could do well: marry, to confess,
Could he get me? Sir Robert could not do it:
We know his handiwork: therefore, good mother,
To whom am I beholding for these limbs?
Sir Robert never holp to make this leg.
Hast thou conspired with thy brother too,
That for thine own gain shouldst defend mine honour?
What means this scorn, thou most untoward knave?
Knight, knight, good mother, Basilisco-like.
What! I am dubbd! I have it on my shoulder.
But, mother, I am not sir Roberts son;
I have disclaimd sir Robert and my land;
Legitimation, name and all is gone:
Then, good my mother, let me know my father;
Some proper man, I hope: who was it, mother?
Hast thou denied thyself a Faulconbridge?
As faithfully as I deny the devil.
King Richard Coeur-de-lion was thy father:
By long and vehement suit I was seduced
To make room for him in my husbands bed:
Heaven lay not my transgression to my charge!
Thou art the issue of my dear offence,
Which was so strongly urged past my defence.
Now, by this light, were I to get again,
Madam, I would not wish a better father.
Some sins do bear their privilege on earth,
And so doth yours; your fault was not your folly:
Needs must you lay your heart at his dispose,
Subjected tribute to commanding love,
Against whose fury and unmatched force
The aweless lion could not wage the fight,
Nor keep his princely heart from Richards hand.
He that perforce robs lions of their hearts
May easily win a womans. Ay, my mother,
With all my heart I thank thee for my father!
Who lives and dares but say thou didst not well
When I was got, Ill send his soul to hell.
Come, lady, I will show thee to my kin;
And they shall say, when Richard me begot,
If thou hadst said him nay, it had been sin:
Who says it was, he lies; I say twas not.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. France. Before Angiers.
Enter AUSTRIA and forces, drums, etc. on one side:  on the other KING PHILIP and his power; LEWIS, ARTHUR, CONSTANCE and attendants
Before Angiers well met, brave Austria.
Arthur, that great forerunner of thy blood,
Richard, that robbd the lion of his heart
And fought the holy wars in Palestine,
By this brave duke came early to his grave:
And for amends to his posterity,
At our importance hither is he come,
To spread his colours, boy, in thy behalf,
And to rebuke the usurpation
Of thy unnatural uncle, English John:
Embrace him, love him, give him welcome hither.
God shall forgive you Coeur-de-lions death
The rather that you give his offspring life,
Shadowing their right under your wings of war:
I give you welcome with a powerless hand,
But with a heart full of unstained love:
Welcome before the gates of Angiers, duke.
A noble boy! Who would not do thee right?
Upon thy cheek lay I this zealous kiss,
As seal to this indenture of my love,
That to my home I will no more return,
Till Angiers and the right thou hast in France,
Together with that pale, that white-faced shore,
Whose foot spurns back the oceans roaring tides
And coops from other lands her islanders,
Even till that England, hedged in with the main,
That water-walled bulwark, still secure
And confident from foreign purposes,
Even till that utmost corner of the west
Salute thee for her king: till then, fair boy,
Will I not think of home, but follow arms.
O, take his mothers thanks, a widows thanks,
Till your strong hand shall help to give him strength
To make a more requital to your love!
The peace of heaven is theirs that lift their swords
In such a just and charitable war.
Well then, to work: our cannon shall be bent
Against the brows of this resisting town.
Call for our chiefest men of discipline,
To cull the plots of best advantages:
Well lay before this town our royal bones,
Wade to the market-place in Frenchmens blood,
But we will make it subject to this boy.
Stay for an answer to your embassy,
Lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood:
My Lord Chatillon may from England bring,
That right in peace which here we urge in war,
And then we shall repent each drop of blood
That hot rash haste so indirectly shed.
Enter CHATILLON
A wonder, lady! lo, upon thy wish,
Our messenger Chatillon is arrived!
What England says, say briefly, gentle lord;
We coldly pause for thee; Chatillon, speak.
Then turn your forces from this paltry siege
And stir them up against a mightier task.
England, impatient of your just demands,
Hath put himself in arms: the adverse winds,
Whose leisure I have stayd, have given him time
To land his legions all as soon as I;
His marches are expedient to this town,
His forces strong, his soldiers confident.
With him along is come the mother-queen,
An Ate, stirring him to blood and strife;
With her her niece, the Lady Blanch of Spain;
With them a bastard of the kings deceased,
And all the unsettled humours of the land,
Rash, inconsiderate, fiery voluntaries,
With ladies faces and fierce dragons spleens,
Have sold their fortunes at their native homes,
Bearing their birthrights proudly on their backs,
To make hazard of new fortunes here:
In brief, a braver choice of dauntless spirits
Than now the English bottoms have waft oer
Did nearer float upon the swelling tide,
To do offence and scath in Christendom.
Drum beats
The interruption of their churlish drums
Cuts off more circumstance: they are at hand,
To parley or to fight; therefore prepare.
How much unlookd for is this expedition!
By how much unexpected, by so much
We must awake endavour for defence;
For courage mounteth with occasion:
Let them be welcome then: we are prepared.
Enter KING JOHN, QUEEN ELINOR, BLANCH, the BASTARD, Lords, and forces
Peace be to France, if France in peace permit
Our just and lineal entrance to our own;
If not, bleed France, and peace ascend to heaven,
Whiles we, Gods wrathful agent, do correct
Their proud contempt that beats His peace to heaven.
Peace be to England, if that war return
From France to England, there to live in peace.
England we love; and for that Englands sake
With burden of our armour here we sweat.
This toil of ours should be a work of thine;
But thou from loving England art so far,
That thou hast under-wrought his lawful king
Cut off the sequence of posterity,
Out-faced infant state and done a rape
Upon the maiden virtue of the crown.
Look here upon thy brother Geffreys face;
These eyes, these brows, were moulded out of his:
This little abstract doth contain that large
Which died in Geffrey, and the hand of time
Shall draw this brief into as huge a volume.
That Geffrey was thy elder brother born,
And this his son; England was Geffreys right
And this is Geffreys: in the name of God
How comes it then that thou art calld a king,
When living blood doth in these temples beat,
Which owe the crown that thou oermasterest?
From whom hast thou this great commission, France,
To draw my answer from thy articles?
From that supernal judge, that stirs good thoughts
In any breast of strong authority,
To look into the blots and stains of right:
That judge hath made me guardian to this boy:
Under whose warrant I impeach thy wrong
And by whose help I mean to chastise it.
Alack, thou dost usurp authority.
Excuse; it is to beat usurping down.
Who is it thou dost call usurper, France?
Let me make answer; thy usurping son.
Out, insolent! thy bastard shall be king,
That thou mayst be a queen, and cheque the world!
My bed was ever to thy son as true
As thine was to thy husband; and this boy
Liker in feature to his father Geffrey
Than thou and John in manners; being as like
As rain to water, or devil to his dam.
My boy a bastard! By my soul, I think
His father never was so true begot:
It cannot be, an if thou wert his mother.
Theres a good mother, boy, that blots thy father.
Theres a good grandam, boy, that would blot thee.
Peace!
Hear the crier.
What the devil art thou?
One that will play the devil, sir, with you,
An a may catch your hide and you alone:
You are the hare of whom the proverb goes,
Whose valour plucks dead lions by the beard;
Ill smoke your skin-coat, an I catch you right;
Sirrah, look tot; i faith, I will, i faith.
O, well did he become that lions robe
That did disrobe the lion of that robe!
It lies as sightly on the back of him
As great Alcides shows upon an ass:
But, ass, Ill take that burthen from your back,
Or lay on that shall make your shoulders crack.
What craker is this same that deafs our ears
With this abundance of superfluous breath?
Lewis, determine what we shall do straight.
Women and fools, break off your conference.
King John, this is the very sum of all;
England and Ireland, Anjou, Touraine, Maine,
In right of Arthur do I claim of thee:
Wilt thou resign them and lay down thy arms?
My life as soon: I do defy thee, France.
Arthur of Bretagne, yield thee to my hand;
And out of my dear love Ill give thee more
Than eer the coward hand of France can win:
Submit thee, boy.
Come to thy grandam, child.
Do, child, go to it grandam, child:
Give grandam kingdom, and it grandam will
Give it a plum, a cherry, and a fig:
Theres a good grandam.
Good my mother, peace!
I would that I were low laid in my grave:
I am not worth this coil thats made for me.
His mother shames him so, poor boy, he weeps.
Now shame upon you, whether she does or no!
His grandams wrongs, and not his mothers shames,
Draws those heaven-moving pearls from his poor eyes,
Which heaven shall take in nature of a fee;
Ay, with these crystal beads heaven shall be bribed
To do him justice and revenge on you.
Thou monstrous slanderer of heaven and earth!
Thou monstrous injurer of heaven and earth!
Call not me slanderer; thou and thine usurp
The dominations, royalties and rights
Of this oppressed boy: this is thy eldst sons son,
Infortunate in nothing but in thee:
Thy sins are visited in this poor child;
The canon of the law is laid on him,
Being but the second generation
Removed from thy sin-conceiving womb.
Bedlam, have done.
I have but this to say,
That he is not only plagued for her sin,
But God hath made her sin and her the plague
On this removed issue, plague for her
And with her plague; her sin his injury,
Her injury the beadle to her sin,
All punishd in the person of this child,
And all for her; a plague upon her!
Thou unadvised scold, I can produce
A will that bars the title of thy son.
Ay, who doubts that? a will! a wicked will:
A womans will; a cankerd grandams will!
Peace, lady! pause, or be more temperate:
It ill beseems this presence to cry aim
To these ill-tuned repetitions.
Some trumpet summon hither to the walls
These men of Angiers: let us hear them speak
Whose title they admit, Arthurs or Johns.
Trumpet sounds. Enter certain Citizens upon the walls
Who is it that hath warnd us to the walls?
Tis France, for England.
England, for itself.
You men of Angiers, and my loving subjects--
You loving men of Angiers, Arthurs subjects,
Our trumpet calld you to this gentle parle--
For our advantage; therefore hear us first.
These flags of France, that are advanced here
Before the eye and prospect of your town,
Have hither marchd to your endamagement:
