Here PROCULEIUS and two of the Guard ascend the  monument by a ladder placed against a window, and,  having descended, come behind CLEOPATRA. Some of the Guard unbar and open the gates
To PROCULEIUS and the Guard
Guard her till Caesar come.
Exit
Royal queen!
O Cleopatra! thou art taken, queen:
Quick, quick, good hands.
Drawing a dagger
Hold, worthy lady, hold:
Seizes and disarms her
Do not yourself such wrong, who are in this
Relieved, but not betrayd.
What, of death too,
That rids our dogs of languish?
Cleopatra,
Do not abuse my masters bounty by
The undoing of yourself: let the world see
His nobleness well acted, which your death
Will never let come forth.
Where art thou, death?
Come hither, come! come, come, and take a queen
Worthy many babes and beggars!
O, temperance, lady!
Sir, I will eat no meat, Ill not drink, sir;
If idle talk will once be necessary,
Ill not sleep neither: this mortal house Ill ruin,
Do Caesar what he can. Know, sir, that I
Will not wait piniond at your masters court;
Nor once be chastised with the sober eye
Of dull Octavia. Shall they hoist me up
And show me to the shouting varletry
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt
Be gentle grave unto me! rather on Nilus mud
Lay me stark naked, and let the water-flies
Blow me into abhorring! rather make
My countrys high pyramides my gibbet,
And hang me up in chains!
You do extend
These thoughts of horror further than you shall
Find cause in Caesar.
Enter DOLABELLA
Proculeius,
What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows,
And he hath sent for thee: for the queen,
Ill take her to my guard.
So, Dolabella,
It shall content me best: be gentle to her.
To CLEOPATRA
To Caesar I will speak what you shall please,
If youll employ me to him.
Say, I would die.
Exeunt PROCULEIUS and Soldiers
Most noble empress, you have heard of me?
I cannot tell.
Assuredly you know me.
No matter, sir, what I have heard or known.
You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams;
Ist not your trick?
I understand not, madam.
I dreamd there was an Emperor Antony:
O, such another sleep, that I might see
But such another man!
If it might please ye,--
His face was as the heavens; and therein stuck
A sun and moon, which kept their course,
and lighted
The little O, the earth.
Most sovereign creature,--
His legs bestrid the ocean: his reard arm
Crested the world: his voice was propertied
As all the tuned spheres, and that to friends;
But when he meant to quail and shake the orb,
He was as rattling thunder. For his bounty,
There was no winter int; an autumn twas
That grew the more by reaping: his delights
Were dolphin-like; they showd his back above
The element they lived in: in his livery
Walkd crowns and crownets; realms and islands were
As plates droppd from his pocket.
Cleopatra!
Think you there was, or might be, such a man
As this I dreamd of?
Gentle madam, no.
You lie, up to the hearing of the gods.
But, if there be, or ever were, one such,
Its past the size of dreaming: nature wants stuff
To vie strange forms with fancy; yet, to imagine
And Antony, were natures piece gainst fancy,
Condemning shadows quite.
Hear me, good madam.
Your loss is as yourself, great; and you bear it
As answering to the weight: would I might never
Oertake pursued success, but I do feel,
By the rebound of yours, a grief that smites
My very heart at root.
I thank you, sir,
Know you what Caesar means to do with me?
I am loath to tell you what I would you knew.
Nay, pray you, sir,--
Though he be honourable,--
Hell lead me, then, in triumph?
Madam, he will; I knowt.
Flourish, and shout within, Make way there: Octavius Caesar!
Enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR, GALLUS, PROCULEIUS, MECAENAS, SELEUCUS, and others of his Train
Which is the Queen of Egypt?
It is the emperor, madam.
CLEOPATRA kneels
Arise, you shall not kneel:
I pray you, rise; rise, Egypt.
Sir, the gods
Will have it thus; my master and my lord
I must obey.
Take to you no hard thoughts:
The record of what injuries you did us,
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
As things but done by chance.
Sole sir o the world,
I cannot project mine own cause so well
To make it clear; but do confess I have
Been laden with like frailties which before
Have often shamed our sex.
Cleopatra, know,
We will extenuate rather than enforce:
If you apply yourself to our intents,
Which towards you are most gentle, you shall find
A benefit in this change; but if you seek
To lay on me a cruelty, by taking
Antonys course, you shall bereave yourself
Of my good purposes, and put your children
To that destruction which Ill guard them from,
If thereon you rely. Ill take my leave.
And may, through all the world: tis yours; and we,
Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest, shall
Hang in what place you please. Here, my good lord.
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra.
This is the brief of money, plate, and jewels,
I am possessd of: tis exactly valued;
Not petty things admitted. Wheres Seleucus?
Here, madam.
This is my treasurer: let him speak, my lord,
Upon his peril, that I have reserved
To myself nothing. Speak the truth, Seleucus.
Madam,
I had rather seal my lips, than, to my peril,
Speak that which is not.
What have I kept back?
Enough to purchase what you have made known.
Nay, blush not, Cleopatra; I approve
Your wisdom in the deed.
See, Caesar! O, behold,
How pomp is followd! mine will now be yours;
And, should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus does
Even make me wild: O slave, of no more trust
Than love thats hired! What, goest thou back? thou shalt
Go back, I warrant thee; but Ill catch thine eyes,
Though they had wings: slave, soulless villain, dog!
O rarely base!
Good queen, let us entreat you.
O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
That thou, vouchsafing here to visit me,
Doing the honour of thy lordliness
To one so meek, that mine own servant should
Parcel the sum of my disgraces by
Addition of his envy! Say, good Caesar,
That I some lady trifles have reserved,
Immoment toys, things of such dignity
As we greet modern friends withal; and say,
Some nobler token I have kept apart
For Livia and Octavia, to induce
Their mediation; must I be unfolded
With one that I have bred? The gods! it smites me
Beneath the fall I have.
To SELEUCUS
Prithee, go hence;
Or I shall show the cinders of my spirits
Through the ashes of my chance: wert thou a man,
Thou wouldst have mercy on me.
Forbear, Seleucus.
Exit SELEUCUS
Be it known, that we, the greatest, are misthought
For things that others do; and, when we fall,
We answer others merits in our name,
Are therefore to be pitied.
Cleopatra,
Not what you have reserved, nor what acknowledged,
Put we i the roll of conquest: still bet yours,
Bestow it at your pleasure; and believe,
Caesars no merchant, to make prize with you
Of things that merchants sold. Therefore be cheerd;
Make not your thoughts your prisons: no, dear queen;
For we intend so to dispose you as
Yourself shall give us counsel. Feed, and sleep:
Our care and pity is so much upon you,
That we remain your friend; and so, adieu.
My master, and my lord!
Not so. Adieu.
Flourish. Exeunt OCTAVIUS CAESAR and his train
He words me, girls, he words me, that I should not
Be noble to myself: but, hark thee, Charmian.
Whispers CHARMIAN
Finish, good lady; the bright day is done,
And we are for the dark.
Hie thee again:
I have spoke already, and it is provided;
Go put it to the haste.
Madam, I will.
Re-enter DOLABELLA
Where is the queen?
Behold, sir.
Exit
Dolabella!
Madam, as thereto sworn by your command,
Which my love makes religion to obey,
I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
Intends his journey; and within three days
You with your children will he send before:
Make your best use of this: I have performd
Your pleasure and my promise.
Dolabella,
I shall remain your debtor.
I your servant,
Adieu, good queen; I must attend on Caesar.
Farewell, and thanks.
Exit DOLABELLA
Now, Iras, what thinkst thou?
Thou, an Egyptian puppet, shalt be shown
In Rome, as well as Imechanic slaves
With greasy aprons, rules, and hammers, shall
Uplift us to the view; in their thick breaths,
Rank of gross diet, shall be enclouded,
And forced to drink their vapour.
The gods forbid!
Nay, tis most certain, Iras: saucy lictors
Will catch at us, like strumpets; and scald rhymers
Ballad us out o tune: the quick comedians
Extemporally will stage us, and present
Our Alexandrian revels; Antony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra boy my greatness
I the posture of a whore.
O the good gods!
Nay, thats certain.
Ill never see t; for, I am sure, my nails
Are stronger than mine eyes.
Why, thats the way
To fool their preparation, and to conquer
Their most absurd intents.
Re-enter CHARMIAN
Now, Charmian!
Show me, my women, like a queen: go fetch
My best attires: I am again for Cydnus,
To meet Mark Antony: sirrah Iras, go.
Now, noble Charmian, well dispatch indeed;
And, when thou hast done this chare, Ill give thee leave
To play till doomsday. Bring our crown and all.
Wherefores this noise?
Exit IRAS. A noise within
Enter a Guardsman
Here is a rural fellow
That will not be denied your highness presence:
He brings you figs.
Let him come in.
Exit Guardsman
What poor an instrument
May do a noble deed! he brings me liberty.
My resolutions placed, and I have nothing
Of woman in me: now from head to foot
I am marble-constant; now the fleeting moon
No planet is of mine.
Re-enter Guardsman, with Clown bringing in a basket
This is the man.
Avoid, and leave him.
Exit Guardsman
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there,
That kills and pains not?
Truly, I have him: but I would not be the party
that should desire you to touch him, for his biting
is immortal; those that do die of it do seldom or
never recover.
Rememberest thou any that have died ont?
Very many, men and women too. I heard of one of
them no longer than yesterday: a very honest woman,
but something given to lie; as a woman should not
do, but in the way of honesty: how she died of the
biting of it, what pain she felt: truly, she makes
a very good report o the worm; but he that will
believe all that they say, shall never be saved by
half that they do: but this is most fallible, the
worms an odd worm.
Get thee hence; farewell.
I wish you all joy of the worm.
Setting down his basket
Farewell.
You must think this, look you, that the worm will
do his kind.
Ay, ay; farewell.
Look you, the worm is not to be trusted but in the
keeping of wise people; for, indeed, there is no
goodness in worm.
Take thou no care; it shall be heeded.
Very good. Give it nothing, I pray you, for it is
not worth the feeding.
Will it eat me?
You must not think I am so simple but I know the
devil himself will not eat a woman: I know that a
woman is a dish for the gods, if the devil dress her
not. But, truly, these same whoreson devils do the
gods great harm in their women; for in every ten
that they make, the devils mar five.
Well, get thee gone; farewell.
Yes, forsooth: I wish you joy o the worm.
Exit
Re-enter IRAS with a robe, crown,  and c
Give me my robe, put on my crown; I have
Immortal longings in me: now no more
The juice of Egypts grape shall moist this lip:
Yare, yare, good Iras; quick. Methinks I hear
Antony call; I see him rouse himself
To praise my noble act; I hear him mock
The luck of Caesar, which the gods give men
To excuse their after wrath: husband, I come:
Now to that name my courage prove my title!
I am fire and air; my other elements
I give to baser life. So; have you done?
Come then, and take the last warmth of my lips.
Farewell, kind Charmian; Iras, long farewell.
Kisses them. IRAS falls and dies
Have I the aspic in my lips? Dost fall?
If thou and nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a lovers pinch,
Which hurts, and is desired. Dost thou lie still?
If thus thou vanishest, thou tellst the world
It is not worth leave-taking.
Dissolve, thick cloud, and rain; that I may say,
The gods themselves do weep!
This proves me base:
If she first meet the curled Antony,
Hell make demand of her, and spend that kiss
Which is my heaven to have. Come, thou
mortal wretch,
To an asp, which she applies to her breast
With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate
Of life at once untie: poor venomous fool
Be angry, and dispatch. O, couldst thou speak,
That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass
Unpolicied!
O eastern star!
Peace, peace!
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast,
That sucks the nurse asleep?
O, break! O, break!
As sweet as balm, as soft as air, as gentle,--
O Antony!--Nay, I will take thee too.
Applying another asp to her arm
What should I stay--
Dies
In this vile world? So, fare thee well.
Now boast thee, death, in thy possession lies
A lass unparalleld. Downy windows, close;
And golden Phoebus never be beheld
Of eyes again so royal! Your crowns awry;
Ill mend it, and then play.
Enter the Guard, rushing in
Where is the queen?
Speak softly, wake her not.
Caesar hath sent--
Too slow a messenger.
Applies an asp
O, come apace, dispatch! I partly feel thee.
Approach, ho! Alls not well: Caesars beguiled.
Theres Dolabella sent from Caesar; call him.
What work is here! Charmian, is this well done?
It is well done, and fitting for a princess
Descended of so many royal kings.
Ah, soldier!
Dies
Re-enter DOLABELLA
How goes it here?
All dead.
Caesar, thy thoughts
Touch their effects in this: thyself art coming
To see performd the dreaded act which thou
So soughtst to hinder.
Within  A way there, a way for Caesar!
Re-enter OCTAVIUS CAESAR and all his train marching
O sir, you are too sure an augurer;
That you did fear is done.
Bravest at the last,
She levelld at our purposes, and, being royal,
Took her own way. The manner of their deaths?
I do not see them bleed.
Who was last with them?
A simple countryman, that brought her figs:
This was his basket.
Poisond, then.
O Caesar,
This Charmian lived but now; she stood and spake:
I found her trimming up the diadem
On her dead mistress; tremblingly she stood
And on the sudden droppd.
O noble weakness!
If they had swallowd poison, twould appear
By external swelling: but she looks like sleep,
As she would catch another Antony
In her strong toil of grace.
Here, on her breast,
There is a vent of blood and something blown:
The like is on her arm.
This is an aspics trail: and these fig-leaves
Have slime upon them, such as the aspic leaves
Upon the caves of Nile.
Most probable
That so she died; for her physician tells me
She hath pursued conclusions infinite
Of easy ways to die. Take up her bed;
And bear her women from the monument:
She shall be buried by her Antony:
No grave upon the earth shall clip in it
A pair so famous. High events as these
Strike those that make them; and their story is
No less in pity than his glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our army shall
In solemn show attend this funeral;
And then to Rome. Come, Dolabella, see
High order in this great solemnity.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. A hall in DUKE SOLINUSS palace.
Enter DUKE SOLINUS, AEGEON, Gaoler, Officers, and other Attendants
Proceed, Solinus, to procure my fall
And by the doom of death end woes and all.
Merchant of Syracuse, plead no more;
I am not partial to infringe our laws:
The enmity and discord which of late
Sprung from the rancorous outrage of your duke
To merchants, our well-dealing countrymen,
Who wanting guilders to redeem their lives
Have seald his rigorous statutes with their bloods,
Excludes all pity from our threatening looks.
For, since the mortal and intestine jars
Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us,
It hath in solemn synods been decreed
Both by the Syracusians and ourselves,
To admit no traffic to our adverse towns Nay, more,
If any born at Ephesus be seen
At any Syracusian marts and fairs;
Again: if any Syracusian born
Come to the bay of Ephesus, he dies,
His goods confiscate to the dukes dispose,
Unless a thousand marks be levied,
To quit the penalty and to ransom him.
Thy substance, valued at the highest rate,
Cannot amount unto a hundred marks;
Therefore by law thou art condemned to die.
Yet this my comfort: when your words are done,
My woes end likewise with the evening sun.
Well, Syracusian, say in brief the cause
Why thou departedst from thy native home
And for what cause thou camest to Ephesus.
A heavier task could not have been imposed
Than I to speak my griefs unspeakable:
Yet, that the world may witness that my end
Was wrought by nature, not by vile offence,
Ill utter what my sorrows give me leave.
In Syracusa was I born, and wed
Unto a woman, happy but for me,
And by me, had not our hap been bad.
With her I lived in joy; our wealth increased
By prosperous voyages I often made
To Epidamnum; till my factors death
And the great care of goods at random left
Drew me from kind embracements of my spouse:
From whom my absence was not six months old
Before herself, almost at fainting under
The pleasing punishment that women bear,
Had made provision for her following me
And soon and safe arrived where I was.
There had she not been long, but she became
A joyful mother of two goodly sons;
And, which was strange, the one so like the other,
As could not be distinguishd but by names.
That very hour, and in the self-same inn,
A meaner woman was delivered
Of such a burden, male twins, both alike:
Those,--for their parents were exceeding poor,--
I bought and brought up to attend my sons.
My wife, not meanly proud of two such boys,
Made daily motions for our home return:
Unwilling I agreed. Alas! too soon,
We came aboard.
A league from Epidamnum had we saild,
Before the always wind-obeying deep
Gave any tragic instance of our harm:
But longer did we not retain much hope;
For what obscured light the heavens did grant
Did but convey unto our fearful minds
A doubtful warrant of immediate death;
Which though myself would gladly have embraced,
Yet the incessant weepings of my wife,
Weeping before for what she saw must come,
And piteous plainings of the pretty babes,
That mournd for fashion, ignorant what to fear,
Forced me to seek delays for them and me.
And this it was, for other means was none:
The sailors sought for safety by our boat,
And left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us:
My wife, more careful for the latter-born,
Had fastend him unto a small spare mast,
Such as seafaring men provide for storms;
To him one of the other twins was bound,
Whilst I had been like heedful of the other:
The children thus disposed, my wife and I,
Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixd,
Fastend ourselves at either end the mast;
And floating straight, obedient to the stream,
Was carried towards Corinth, as we thought.
At length the sun, gazing upon the earth,
Dispersed those vapours that offended us;
And by the benefit of his wished light,
The seas waxd calm, and we discovered
Two ships from far making amain to us,
Of Corinth that, of Epidaurus this:
But ere they came,--O, let me say no more!
Gather the sequel by that went before.
Nay, forward, old man; do not break off so;
For we may pity, though not pardon thee.
O, had the gods done so, I had not now
Worthily termd them merciless to us!
For, ere the ships could meet by twice five leagues,
We were encounterd by a mighty rock;
Which being violently borne upon,
Our helpful ship was splitted in the midst;
So that, in this unjust divorce of us,
Fortune had left to both of us alike
What to delight in, what to sorrow for.
Her part, poor soul! seeming as burdened
With lesser weight but not with lesser woe,
Was carried with more speed before the wind;
And in our sight they three were taken up
By fishermen of Corinth, as we thought.
At length, another ship had seized on us;
And, knowing whom it was their hap to save,
Gave healthful welcome to their shipwreckd guests;
And would have reft the fishers of their prey,
Had not their bark been very slow of sail;
And therefore homeward did they bend their course.
Thus have you heard me severd from my bliss;
That by misfortunes was my life prolongd,
To tell sad stories of my own mishaps.
And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for,
Do me the favour to dilate at full
What hath befalln of them and thee till now.
My youngest boy, and yet my eldest care,
At eighteen years became inquisitive
After his brother: and importuned me
That his attendant--so his case was like,
Reft of his brother, but retaind his name--
Might bear him company in the quest of him:
Whom whilst I labourd of a love to see,
I hazarded the loss of whom I loved.
Five summers have I spent in furthest Greece,
Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia,
And, coasting homeward, came to Ephesus;
Hopeless to find, yet loath to leave unsought
Or that or any place that harbours men.
But here must end the story of my life;
And happy were I in my timely death,
Could all my travels warrant me they live.
Hapless AEgeon, whom the fates have markd
To bear the extremity of dire mishap!
Now, trust me, were it not against our laws,
Against my crown, my oath, my dignity,
Which princes, would they, may not disannul,
My soul would sue as advocate for thee.
But, though thou art adjudged to the death
And passed sentence may not be recalld
But to our honours great disparagement,
Yet I will favour thee in what I can.
Therefore, merchant, Ill limit thee this day
To seek thy life by beneficial help:
Try all the friends thou hast in Ephesus;
Beg thou, or borrow, to make up the sum,
And live; if no, then thou art doomd to die.
Gaoler, take him to thy custody.
I will, my lord.
Hopeless and helpless doth AEgeon wend,
But to procrastinate his lifeless end.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The Mart.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse, DROMIO of Syracuse, and First Merchant
Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum,
Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate.
This very day a Syracusian merchant
Is apprehended for arrival here;
And not being able to buy out his life
According to the statute of the town,
Dies ere the weary sun set in the west.
There is your money that I had to keep.
ANTIPHOLUS
Go bear it to the Centaur, where we host,
And stay there, Dromio, till I come to thee.
Within this hour it will be dinner-time:
Till that, Ill view the manners of the town,
Peruse the traders, gaze upon the buildings,
And then return and sleep within mine inn,
For with long travel I am stiff and weary.
Get thee away.
Many a man would take you at your word,
And go indeed, having so good a mean.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
A trusty villain, sir, that very oft,
When I am dull with care and melancholy,
Lightens my humour with his merry jests.
What, will you walk with me about the town,
And then go to my inn and dine with me?
I am invited, sir, to certain merchants,
Of whom I hope to make much benefit;
I crave your pardon. Soon at five oclock,
Please you, Ill meet with you upon the mart
And afterward consort you till bed-time:
My present business calls me from you now.
ANTIPHOLUS
Farewell till then: I will go lose myself
And wander up and down to view the city.
Sir, I commend you to your own content.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
He that commends me to mine own content
Commends me to the thing I cannot get.
I to the world am like a drop of water
That in the ocean seeks another drop,
Who, falling there to find his fellow forth,
Unseen, inquisitive, confounds himself:
So I, to find a mother and a brother,
In quest of them, unhappy, lose myself.
Enter DROMIO of Ephesus
Here comes the almanac of my true date.
What now? how chance thou art returnd so soon?
Returnd so soon! rather approachd too late:
The capon burns, the pig falls from the spit,
The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell;
My mistress made it one upon my cheek:
She is so hot because the meat is cold;
The meat is cold because you come not home;
You come not home because you have no stomach;
You have no stomach having broke your fast;
But we that know what tis to fast and pray
Are penitent for your default to-day.
ANTIPHOLUS
Stop in your wind, sir: tell me this, I pray:
Where have you left the money that I gave you?
O,--sixpence, that I had o Wednesday last
To pay the saddler for my mistress crupper?
The saddler had it, sir; I kept it not.
ANTIPHOLUS
I am not in a sportive humour now:
Tell me, and dally not, where is the money?
We being strangers here, how darest thou trust
So great a charge from thine own custody?
I pray you, air, as you sit at dinner:
I from my mistress come to you in post;
If I return, I shall be post indeed,
For she will score your fault upon my pate.
Methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock,
And strike you home without a messenger.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come, Dromio, come, these jests are out of season;
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this.
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee?
To me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come on, sir knave, have done your foolishness,
And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge.
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart
Home to your house, the Phoenix, sir, to dinner:
My mistress and her sister stays for you.
ANTIPHOLUS
In what safe place you have bestowd my money,
Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours
That stands on tricks when I am undisposed:
Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me?
I have some marks of yours upon my pate,
Some of my mistress marks upon my shoulders,
But not a thousand marks between you both.
If I should pay your worship those again,
Perchance you will not bear them patiently.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thy mistress marks? what mistress, slave, hast thou?
Your worships wife, my mistress at the Phoenix;
She that doth fast till you come home to dinner,
And prays that you will hie you home to dinner.
ANTIPHOLUS
What, wilt thou flout me thus unto my face,
Being forbid? There, take you that, sir knave.
What mean you, sir? for Gods sake, hold your hands!
Nay, and you will not, sir, Ill take my heels.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
Upon my life, by some device or other
The villain is oer-raught of all my money.
They say this town is full of cozenage,
As, nimble jugglers that deceive the eye,
Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind,
Soul-killing witches that deform the body,
Disguised cheaters, prating mountebanks,
And many such-like liberties of sin:
If it prove so, I will be gone the sooner.
Ill to the Centaur, to go seek this slave:
I greatly fear my money is not safe.
Exit
ACT II
SCENE I. The house of ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus.
Enter ADRIANA and LUCIANA
Neither my husband nor the slave returnd,
That in such haste I sent to seek his master!
Sure, Luciana, it is two oclock.
Perhaps some merchant hath invited him,
And from the mart hes somewhere gone to dinner.
Good sister, let us dine and never fret:
A man is master of his liberty:
Time is their master, and, when they see time,
Theyll go or come: if so, be patient, sister.
Why should their liberty than ours be more?
Because their business still lies out o door.
Look, when I serve him so, he takes it ill.
O, know he is the bridle of your will.
Theres none but asses will be bridled so.
Why, headstrong liberty is lashd with woe.
Theres nothing situate under heavens eye
But hath his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky:
The beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls,
Are their males subjects and at their controls:
Men, more divine, the masters of all these,
Lords of the wide world and wild watery seas,
Indued with intellectual sense and souls,
Of more preeminence than fish and fowls,
Are masters to their females, and their lords:
Then let your will attend on their accords.
This servitude makes you to keep unwed.
Not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.
But, were you wedded, you would bear some sway.
Ere I learn love, Ill practise to obey.
How if your husband start some other where?
Till he come home again, I would forbear.
Patience unmoved! no marvel though she pause;
They can be meek that have no other cause.
A wretched soul, bruised with adversity,
We bid be quiet when we hear it cry;
But were we burdened with like weight of pain,
As much or more would we ourselves complain:
So thou, that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee,
With urging helpless patience wouldst relieve me,
But, if thou live to see like right bereft,
This fool-beggd patience in thee will be left.
Well, I will marry one day, but to try.
Here comes your man; now is your husband nigh.
Enter DROMIO of Ephesus
Say, is your tardy master now at hand?
Nay, hes at two hands with me, and that my two ears
can witness.
Say, didst thou speak with him? knowst thou his mind?
Ay, ay, he told his mind upon mine ear:
Beshrew his hand, I scarce could understand it.
Spake he so doubtfully, thou couldst not feel his meaning?
Nay, he struck so plainly, I could too well feel his
blows; and withal so doubtfully that I could scarce
understand them.
But say, I prithee, is he coming home? It seems he
hath great care to please his wife.
Why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad.
Horn-mad, thou villain!
I mean not cuckold-mad;
But, sure, he is stark mad.
When I desired him to come home to dinner,
He askd me for a thousand marks in gold:
Tis dinner-time, quoth I; My gold! quoth he;
Your meat doth burn, quoth I; My gold! quoth he:
Will you come home? quoth I; My gold! quoth he.
Where is the thousand marks I gave thee, villain?
The pig, quoth I, is burnd; My gold! quoth he:
My mistress, sir quoth I; Hang up thy mistress!
I know not thy mistress; out on thy mistress!
Quoth who?
Quoth my master:
I know, quoth he, no house, no wife, no mistress.
So that my errand, due unto my tongue,
I thank him, I bare home upon my shoulders;
For, in conclusion, he did beat me there.
Go back again, thou slave, and fetch him home.
Go back again, and be new beaten home?
For Gods sake, send some other messenger.
Back, slave, or I will break thy pate across.
And he will bless that cross with other beating:
Between you I shall have a holy head.
Hence, prating peasant! fetch thy master home.
Am I so round with you as you with me,
That like a football you do spurn me thus?
You spurn me hence, and he will spurn me hither:
If I last in this service, you must case me in leather.
Exit
Fie, how impatience loureth in your face!
His company must do his minions grace,
Whilst I at home starve for a merry look.
Hath homely age the alluring beauty took
From my poor cheek? then he hath wasted it:
Are my discourses dull? barren my wit?
If voluble and sharp discourse be marrd,
Unkindness blunts it more than marble hard:
Do their gay vestments his affections bait?
Thats not my fault: hes master of my state:
What ruins are in me that can be found,
By him not ruind? then is he the ground
Of my defeatures. My decayed fair
A sunny look of his would soon repair
But, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale
And feeds from home; poor I am but his stale.
Self-harming jealousy! fie, beat it hence!
Unfeeling fools can with such wrongs dispense.
I know his eye doth homage otherwhere,
Or else what lets it but he would be here?
Sister, you know he promised me a chain;
Would that alone, alone he would detain,
So he would keep fair quarter with his bed!
I see the jewel best enamelled
Will lose his beauty; yet the gold bides still,
That others touch, and often touching will
Wear gold: and no man that hath a name,
By falsehood and corruption doth it shame.
Since that my beauty cannot please his eye,
Ill weep whats left away, and weeping die.
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy!
Exeunt
SCENE II. A public place.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse
ANTIPHOLUS
The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up
Safe at the Centaur; and the heedful slave
Is wanderd forth, in care to seek me out
By computation and mine hosts report.
I could not speak with Dromio since at first
I sent him from the mart. See, here he comes.
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse
How now sir! is your merry humour alterd?
As you love strokes, so jest with me again.
You know no Centaur? you received no gold?
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner?
My house was at the Phoenix? Wast thou mad,
That thus so madly thou didst answer me?
What answer, sir? when spake I such a word?
ANTIPHOLUS
Even now, even here, not half an hour since.
I did not see you since you sent me hence,
Home to the Centaur, with the gold you gave me.
ANTIPHOLUS
Villain, thou didst deny the golds receipt,
And toldst me of a mistress and a dinner;
For which, I hope, thou feltst I was displeased.
I am glad to see you in this merry vein:
What means this jest? I pray you, master, tell me.
ANTIPHOLUS
Yea, dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth?
Thinkst thou I jest? Hold, take thou that, and that.
Beating him
Hold, sir, for Gods sake! now your jest is earnest:
Upon what bargain do you give it me?
ANTIPHOLUS
Because that I familiarly sometimes
Do use you for my fool and chat with you,
Your sauciness will jest upon my love
And make a common of my serious hours.
When the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport,
But creep in crannies when he hides his beams.
If you will jest with me, know my aspect,
And fashion your demeanor to my looks,
Or I will beat this method in your sconce.
Sconce call you it? so you would leave battering, I
had rather have it a head: an you use these blows
long, I must get a sconce for my head and ensconce
it too; or else I shall seek my wit in my shoulders.
But, I pray, sir why am I beaten?
ANTIPHOLUS
Dost thou not know?
Nothing, sir, but that I am beaten.
ANTIPHOLUS
Shall I tell you why?
Ay, sir, and wherefore; for they say every why hath
a wherefore.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, first,--for flouting me; and then, wherefore--
For urging it the second time to me.
Was there ever any man thus beaten out of season,
When in the why and the wherefore is neither rhyme
nor reason?
Well, sir, I thank you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thank me, sir, for what?
Marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.
ANTIPHOLUS
Ill make you amends next, to give you nothing for
something. But say, sir, is it dinner-time?
No, sir; I think the meat wants that I have.
ANTIPHOLUS
In good time, sir; whats that?
Basting.
ANTIPHOLUS
Well, sir, then twill be dry.
If it be, sir, I pray you, eat none of it.
ANTIPHOLUS
Your reason?
Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another
dry basting.
ANTIPHOLUS
Well, sir, learn to jest in good time: theres a
time for all things.
I durst have denied that, before you were so choleric.
ANTIPHOLUS
By what rule, sir?
Marry, sir, by a rule as plain as the plain bald
pate of father Time himself.
ANTIPHOLUS
Lets hear it.
Theres no time for a man to recover his hair that
grows bald by nature.
ANTIPHOLUS
May he not do it by fine and recovery?
Yes, to pay a fine for a periwig and recover the
lost hair of another man.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why is Time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is,
so plentiful an excrement?
Because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts;
and what he hath scanted men in hair he hath given them in wit.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, but theres many a man hath more hair than wit.
Not a man of those but he hath the wit to lose his hair.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit.
The plainer dealer, the sooner lost: yet he loseth
it in a kind of jollity.
ANTIPHOLUS
For what reason?
For two; and sound ones too.
ANTIPHOLUS
Nay, not sound, I pray you.
Sure ones, then.
ANTIPHOLUS
Nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.
Certain ones then.
ANTIPHOLUS
Name them.
The one, to save the money that he spends in
trimming; the other, that at dinner they should not
drop in his porridge.
ANTIPHOLUS
You would all this time have proved there is no
time for all things.
Marry, and did, sir; namely, no time to recover hair
lost by nature.
ANTIPHOLUS
But your reason was not substantial, why there is no
time to recover.
Thus I mend it: Time himself is bald and therefore
to the worlds end will have bald followers.
ANTIPHOLUS
I knew twould be a bald conclusion:
But, soft! who wafts us yonder?
Enter ADRIANA and LUCIANA
Ay, ay, Antipholus, look strange and frown:
Some other mistress hath thy sweet aspects;
I am not Adriana nor thy wife.
The time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow
That never words were music to thine ear,
That never object pleasing in thine eye,
That never touch well welcome to thy hand,
That never meat sweet-savord in thy taste,
Unless I spake, or lookd, or touchd, or carved to thee.
How comes it now, my husband, O, how comes it,
That thou art thus estranged from thyself?
Thyself I call it, being strange to me,
That, undividable, incorporate,
Am better than thy dear selfs better part.
Ah, do not tear away thyself from me!
For know, my love, as easy mayest thou fall
A drop of water in the breaking gulf,
And take unmingled that same drop again,
Without addition or diminishing,
As take from me thyself and not me too.
How dearly would it touch me to the quick,
Shouldst thou but hear I were licentious
And that this body, consecrate to thee,
By ruffian lust should be contaminate!
Wouldst thou not spit at me and spurn at me
And hurl the name of husband in my face
And tear the staind skin off my harlot-brow
And from my false hand cut the wedding-ring
And break it with a deep-divorcing vow?
I know thou canst; and therefore see thou do it.
I am possessd with an adulterate blot;
