My blood is mingled with the crime of lust:
For if we too be one and thou play false,
I do digest the poison of thy flesh,
Being strumpeted by thy contagion.
Keep then far league and truce with thy true bed;
I live unstaind, thou undishonoured.
ANTIPHOLUS
Plead you to me, fair dame? I know you not:
In Ephesus I am but two hours old,
As strange unto your town as to your talk;
Who, every word by all my wit being scannd,
Want wit in all one word to understand.
Fie, brother! how the world is changed with you!
When were you wont to use my sister thus?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner.
ANTIPHOLUS
By Dromio?
By me?
By thee; and this thou didst return from him,
That he did buffet thee, and, in his blows,
Denied my house for his, me for his wife.
ANTIPHOLUS
Did you converse, sir, with this gentlewoman?
What is the course and drift of your compact?
I, sir? I never saw her till this time.
ANTIPHOLUS
Villain, thou liest; for even her very words
Didst thou deliver to me on the mart.
I never spake with her in all my life.
ANTIPHOLUS
How can she thus then call us by our names,
Unless it be by inspiration.
How ill agrees it with your gravity
To counterfeit thus grossly with your slave,
Abetting him to thwart me in my mood!
Be it my wrong you are from me exempt,
But wrong not that wrong with a more contempt.
Come, I will fasten on this sleeve of thine:
Thou art an elm, my husband, I a vine,
Whose weakness, married to thy stronger state,
Makes me with thy strength to communicate:
If aught possess thee from me, it is dross,
Usurping ivy, brier, or idle moss;
Who, all for want of pruning, with intrusion
Infect thy sap and live on thy confusion.
ANTIPHOLUS
To me she speaks; she moves me for her theme:
What, was I married to her in my dream?
Or sleep I now and think I hear all this?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss?
Until I know this sure uncertainty,
Ill entertain the offerd fallacy.
Dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
O, for my beads! I cross me for a sinner.
This is the fairy land: O spite of spites!
We talk with goblins, owls and sprites:
If we obey them not, this will ensue,
Theyll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.
Why pratest thou to thyself and answerst not?
Dromio, thou drone, thou snail, thou slug, thou sot!
I am transformed, master, am I not?
ANTIPHOLUS
I think thou art in mind, and so am I.
Nay, master, both in mind and in my shape.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou hast thine own form.
No, I am an ape.
If thou art changed to aught, tis to an ass.
Tis true; she rides me and I long for grass.
Tis so, I am an ass; else it could never be
But I should know her as well as she knows me.
Come, come, no longer will I be a fool,
To put the finger in the eye and weep,
Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn.
Come, sir, to dinner. Dromio, keep the gate.
Husband, Ill dine above with you to-day
And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks.
Sirrah, if any ask you for your master,
Say he dines forth, and let no creature enter.
Come, sister. Dromio, play the porter well.
ANTIPHOLUS
Am I in earth, in heaven, or in hell?
Sleeping or waking? mad or well-advised?
Known unto these, and to myself disguised!
Ill say as they say and persever so,
And in this mist at all adventures go.
Master, shall I be porter at the gate?
Ay; and let none enter, lest I break your pate.
Come, come, Antipholus, we dine too late.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. Before the house of ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus, DROMIO of Ephesus, ANGELO, and BALTHAZAR
ANTIPHOLUS
Good Signior Angelo, you must excuse us all;
My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours:
Say that I lingerd with you at your shop
To see the making of her carcanet,
And that to-morrow you will bring it home.
But heres a villain that would face me down
He met me on the mart, and that I beat him,
And charged him with a thousand marks in gold,
And that I did deny my wife and house.
Thou drunkard, thou, what didst thou mean by this?
Say what you will, sir, but I know what I know;
That you beat me at the mart, I have your hand to show:
If the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink,
Your own handwriting would tell you what I think.
ANTIPHOLUS
I think thou art an ass.
Marry, so it doth appear
By the wrongs I suffer and the blows I bear.
I should kick, being kickd; and, being at that pass,
You would keep from my heels and beware of an ass.
ANTIPHOLUS
Youre sad, Signior Balthazar: pray God our cheer
May answer my good will and your good welcome here.
I hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your
welcome dear.
ANTIPHOLUS
O, Signior Balthazar, either at flesh or fish,
A table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.
Good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.
ANTIPHOLUS
And welcome more common; for thats nothing but words.
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast.
ANTIPHOLUS
Ay, to a niggardly host, and more sparing guest:
But though my cates be mean, take them in good part;
Better cheer may you have, but not with better heart.
But, soft! my door is lockd. Go bid them let us in.
Maud, Bridget, Marian, Cicel, Gillian, Ginn!
[Within]  Mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb,
idiot, patch!
Either get thee from the door, or sit down at the hatch.
Dost thou conjure for wenches, that thou callst
for such store,
When one is one too many? Go, get thee from the door.
What patch is made our porter? My master stays in
the street.
[Within]  Let him walk from whence he came, lest he
catch cold ons feet.
ANTIPHOLUS
Who talks within there? ho, open the door!
[Within]  Right, sir; Ill tell you when, an you tell
me wherefore.
ANTIPHOLUS
Wherefore? for my dinner: I have not dined to-day.
[Within]  Nor to-day here you must not; come again
when you may.
ANTIPHOLUS
What art thou that keepest me out from the house I owe?
[Within]  The porter for this time, sir, and my name
is Dromio.
O villain! thou hast stolen both mine office and my name.
The one neer got me credit, the other mickle blame.
If thou hadst been Dromio to-day in my place,
Thou wouldst have changed thy face for a name or thy
name for an ass.
[Within]  What a coil is there, Dromio? who are those
at the gate?
Let my master in, Luce.
[Within]  Faith, no; he comes too late;
And so tell your master.
O Lord, I must laugh!
Have at you with a proverb--Shall I set in my staff?
[Within]  Have at you with another; thats--When?
can you tell?
[Within]  If thy name be calld Luce--Luce, thou hast
answered him well.
Do you hear, you minion? youll let us in, I hope?
OF EPHESUS
[Within]  I thought to have asked you.
[Within]  And you said no.
So, come, help: well struck! there was blow for blow.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou baggage, let me in.
[Within]  Can you tell for whose sake?
Master, knock the door hard.
[Within]  Let him knock till it ache.
ANTIPHOLUS
Youll cry for this, minion, if I beat the door down.
[Within]  What needs all that, and a pair of stocks in the town?
[Within]  Who is that at the door that keeps all
this noise?
[Within]  By my troth, your town is troubled with
unruly boys.
ANTIPHOLUS
Are you there, wife? you might have come before.
[Within]  Your wife, sir knave! go get you from the door.
If you went in pain, master, this knave would go sore.
Here is neither cheer, sir, nor welcome: we would
fain have either.
In debating which was best, we shall part with neither.
They stand at the door, master; bid them welcome hither.
ANTIPHOLUS
There is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
You would say so, master, if your garments were thin.
Your cake there is warm within; you stand here in the cold:
It would make a man mad as a buck, to be so bought and sold.
ANTIPHOLUS
Go fetch me something: Ill break ope the gate.
[Within]  Break any breaking here, and Ill break your
knaves pate.
A man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind,
Ay, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.
[Within]  It seems thou wantst breaking: out upon
thee, hind!
Heres too much out upon thee! I pray thee,
let me in.
[Within]  Ay, when fowls have no feathers and fish have no fin.
ANTIPHOLUS
Well, Ill break in: go borrow me a crow.
A crow without feather? Master, mean you so?
For a fish without a fin, theres a fowl without a feather;
If a crow help us in, sirrah, well pluck a crow together.
ANTIPHOLUS
Go get thee gone; fetch me an iron crow.
Have patience, sir; O, let it not be so!
Herein you war against your reputation
And draw within the compass of suspect
The unviolated honour of your wife.
Once this,--your long experience of her wisdom,
Her sober virtue, years and modesty,
Plead on her part some cause to you unknown:
And doubt not, sir, but she will well excuse
Why at this time the doors are made against you.
Be ruled by me: depart in patience,
And let us to the Tiger all to dinner,
And about evening come yourself alone
To know the reason of this strange restraint.
If by strong hand you offer to break in
Now in the stirring passage of the day,
A vulgar comment will be made of it,
And that supposed by the common rout
Against your yet ungalled estimation
That may with foul intrusion enter in
And dwell upon your grave when you are dead;
For slander lives upon succession,
For ever housed where it gets possession.
ANTIPHOLUS
You have prevailed: I will depart in quiet,
And, in despite of mirth, mean to be merry.
I know a wench of excellent discourse,
Pretty and witty; wild, and yet, too, gentle:
There will we dine. This woman that I mean,
My wife--but, I protest, without desert--
Hath oftentimes upbraided me withal:
To her will we to dinner.
To Angelo
Get you home
And fetch the chain; by this I know tis made:
Bring it, I pray you, to the Porpentine;
For theres the house: that chain will I bestow--
Be it for nothing but to spite my wife--
Upon mine hostess there: good sir, make haste.
Since mine own doors refuse to entertain me,
Ill knock elsewhere, to see if theyll disdain me.
Ill meet you at that place some hour hence.
ANTIPHOLUS
Do so. This jest shall cost me some expense.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same.
Enter LUCIANA and ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse
And may it be that you have quite forgot
A husbands office? shall, Antipholus.
Even in the spring of love, thy love-springs rot?
Shall love, in building, grow so ruinous?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth,
Then for her wealths sake use her with more kindness:
Or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth;
Muffle your false love with some show of blindness:
Let not my sister read it in your eye;
Be not thy tongue thy own shames orator;
Look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty;
Apparel vice like virtues harbinger;
Bear a fair presence, though your heart be tainted;
Teach sin the carriage of a holy saint;
Be secret-false: what need she be acquainted?
What simple thief brags of his own attaint?
Tis double wrong, to truant with your bed
And let her read it in thy looks at board:
Shame hath a bastard fame, well managed;
Ill d eeds are doubled with an evil word.
Alas, poor women! make us but believe,
Being compact of credit, that you love us;
Though others have the arm, show us the sleeve;
We in your motion turn and you may move us.
Then, gentle brother, get you in again;
Comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife:
Tis holy sport to be a little vain,
When the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
ANTIPHOLUS
Sweet mistress--what your name is else, I know not,
Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine,--
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not
Than our earths wonder, more than earth divine.
Teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak;
Lay open to my earthy-gross conceit,
Smotherd in errors, feeble, shallow, weak,
The folded meaning of your words deceit.
Against my souls pure truth why labour you
To make it wander in an unknown field?
Are you a god? would you create me new?
Transform me then, and to your power Ill yield.
But if that I am I, then well I know
Your weeping sister is no wife of mine,
Nor to her bed no homage do I owe
Far more, far more to you do I decline.
O, train me not, sweet mermaid, with thy note,
To drown me in thy sisters flood of tears:
Sing, siren, for thyself and I will dote:
Spread oer the silver waves thy golden hairs,
And as a bed Ill take them and there lie,
And in that glorious supposition think
He gains by death that hath such means to die:
Let Love, being light, be drowned if she sink!
What, are you mad, that you do reason so?
ANTIPHOLUS
Not mad, but mated; how, I do not know.
It is a fault that springeth from your eye.
ANTIPHOLUS
For gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.
Gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.
ANTIPHOLUS
As good to wink, sweet love, as look on night.
Why call you me love? call my sister so.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thy sisters sister.
Thats my sister.
ANTIPHOLUS
No;
It is thyself, mine own selfs better part,
Mine eyes clear eye, my dear hearts dearer heart,
My food, my fortune and my sweet hopes aim,
My sole earths heaven and my heavens claim.
All this my sister is, or else should be.
ANTIPHOLUS
Call thyself sister, sweet, for I am thee.
Thee will I love and with thee lead my life:
Thou hast no husband yet nor I no wife.
Give me thy hand.
O, soft, air! hold you still:
Ill fetch my sister, to get her good will.
Exit
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, how now, Dromio! where runnst thou so fast?
Do you know me, sir? am I Dromio? am I your man?
am I myself?
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou art Dromio, thou art my man, thou art thyself.
I am an ass, I am a womans man and besides myself.
What womans man? and how besides thyself? besides thyself?
Marry, sir, besides myself, I am due to a woman; one
that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.
ANTIPHOLUS
What claim lays she to thee?
Marry sir, such claim as you would lay to your
horse; and she would have me as a beast: not that, I
being a beast, she would have me; but that she,
being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.
ANTIPHOLUS
What is she?
A very reverent body; ay, such a one as a man may
not speak of without he say Sir-reverence. I have
but lean luck in the match, and yet is she a
wondrous fat marriage.
ANTIPHOLUS
How dost thou mean a fat marriage?
Marry, sir, shes the kitchen wench and all grease;
and I know not what use to put her to but to make a
lamp of her and run from her by her own light. I
warrant, her rags and the tallow in them will burn a
Poland winter: if she lives till doomsday,
shell burn a week longer than the whole world.
ANTIPHOLUS
What complexion is she of?
Swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing half so
clean kept: for why, she sweats; a man may go over
shoes in the grime of it.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thats a fault that water will mend.
No, sir, tis in grain; Noahs flood could not do it.
ANTIPHOLUS
Whats her name?
Nell, sir; but her name and three quarters, thats
an ell and three quarters, will not measure her from
hip to hip.
ANTIPHOLUS
Then she bears some breadth?
No longer from head to foot than from hip to hip:
she is spherical, like a globe; I could find out
countries in her.
ANTIPHOLUS
In what part of her body stands Ireland?
Marry, in her buttocks: I found it out by the bogs.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where Scotland?
I found it by the barrenness; hard in the palm of the hand.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where France?
In her forehead; armed and reverted, making war
against her heir.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where England?
I looked for the chalky cliffs, but I could find no
whiteness in them; but I guess it stood in her chin,
by the salt rheum that ran between France and it.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where Spain?
Faith, I saw it not; but I felt it hot in her breath.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where America, the Indies?
Oh, sir, upon her nose all oer embellished with
rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich
aspect to the hot breath of Spain; who sent whole
armadoes of caracks to be ballast at her nose.
ANTIPHOLUS
Where stood Belgia, the Netherlands?
Oh, sir, I did not look so low. To conclude, this
drudge, or diviner, laid claim to me, calld me
Dromio; swore I was assured to her; told me what
privy marks I had about me, as, the mark of my
shoulder, the mole in my neck, the great wart on my
left arm, that I amazed ran from her as a witch:
And, I think, if my breast had not been made of
faith and my heart of steel,
She had transformd me to a curtal dog and made
me turn i the wheel.
ANTIPHOLUS
Go hie thee presently, post to the road:
An if the wind blow any way from shore,
I will not harbour in this town to-night:
If any bark put forth, come to the mart,
Where I will walk till thou return to me.
If every one knows us and we know none,
Tis time, I think, to trudge, pack and be gone.
As from a bear a man would run for life,
So fly I from her that would be my wife.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
Theres none but witches do inhabit here;
And therefore tis high time that I were hence.
She that doth call me husband, even my soul
Doth for a wife abhor. But her fair sister,
Possessd with such a gentle sovereign grace,
Of such enchanting presence and discourse,
Hath almost made me traitor to myself:
But, lest myself be guilty to self-wrong,
Ill stop mine ears against the mermaids song.
Enter ANGELO with the chain
Master Antipholus,--
ANTIPHOLUS
Ay, thats my name.
I know it well, sir, lo, here is the chain.
I thought to have taen you at the Porpentine:
The chain unfinishd made me stay thus long.
ANTIPHOLUS
What is your will that I shall do with this?
What please yourself, sir: I have made it for you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Made it for me, sir! I bespoke it not.
Not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have.
Go home with it and please your wife withal;
And soon at supper-time Ill visit you
And then receive my money for the chain.
ANTIPHOLUS
I pray you, sir, receive the money now,
For fear you neer see chain nor money more.
You are a merry man, sir: fare you well.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
What I should think of this, I cannot tell:
But this I think, theres no man is so vain
That would refuse so fair an offerd chain.
I see a man here needs not live by shifts,
When in the streets he meets such golden gifts.
Ill to the mart, and there for Dromio stay
If any ship put out, then straight away.
Exit
ACT IV
SCENE I. A public place.
Enter Second Merchant, ANGELO, and an Officer
You know since Pentecost the sum is due,
And since I have not much importuned you;
Nor now I had not, but that I am bound
To Persia, and want guilders for my voyage:
Therefore make present satisfaction,
Or Ill attach you by this officer.
Even just the sum that I do owe to you
Is growing to me by Antipholus,
And in the instant that I met with you
He had of me a chain: at five oclock
I shall receive the money for the same.
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house,
I will discharge my bond and thank you too.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus and DROMIO of Ephesus from the courtezans
That labour may you save: see where he comes.
ANTIPHOLUS
While I go to the goldsmiths house, go thou
And buy a ropes end: that will I bestow
Among my wife and her confederates,
For locking me out of my doors by day.
But, soft! I see the goldsmith. Get thee gone;
Buy thou a rope and bring it home to me.
I buy a thousand pound a year: I buy a rope.
Exit
ANTIPHOLUS
A man is well holp up that trusts to you:
I promised your presence and the chain;
But neither chain nor goldsmith came to me.
Belike you thought our love would last too long,
If it were chaind together, and therefore came not.
Saving your merry humour, heres the note
How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat,
The fineness of the gold and chargeful fashion.
Which doth amount to three odd ducats more
Than I stand debted to this gentleman:
I pray you, see him presently discharged,
For he is bound to sea and stays but for it.
ANTIPHOLUS
I am not furnishd with the present money;
Besides, I have some business in the town.
Good signior, take the stranger to my house
And with you take the chain and bid my wife
Disburse the sum on the receipt thereof:
Perchance I will be there as soon as you.
Then you will bring the chain to her yourself?
ANTIPHOLUS
No; bear it with you, lest I come not time enough.
Well, sir, I will. Have you the chain about you?
ANTIPHOLUS
An if I have not, sir, I hope you have;
Or else you may return without your money.
Nay, come, I pray you, sir, give me the chain:
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman,
And I, to blame, have held him here too long.
ANTIPHOLUS
Good Lord! you use this dalliance to excuse
Your breach of promise to the Porpentine.
I should have chid you for not bringing it,
But, like a shrew, you first begin to brawl.
The hour steals on; I pray you, sir, dispatch.
You hear how he importunes me;--the chain!
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, give it to my wife and fetch your money.
Come, come, you know I gave it you even now.
Either send the chain or send me by some token.
ANTIPHOLUS
Fie, now you run this humour out of breath,
wheres the chain? I pray you, let me see it.
My business cannot brook this dalliance.
Good sir, say whether youll answer me or no:
If not, Ill leave him to the officer.
ANTIPHOLUS
I answer you! what should I answer you?
The money that you owe me for the chain.
ANTIPHOLUS
I owe you none till I receive the chain.
You know I gave it you half an hour since.
ANTIPHOLUS
You gave me none: you wrong me much to say so.
You wrong me more, sir, in denying it:
Consider how it stands upon my credit.
Well, officer, arrest him at my suit.
I do; and charge you in the dukes name to obey me.
This touches me in reputation.
Either consent to pay this sum for me
Or I attach you by this officer.
ANTIPHOLUS
Consent to pay thee that I never had!
Arrest me, foolish fellow, if thou darest.
Here is thy fee; arrest him, officer,
I would not spare my brother in this case,
If he should scorn me so apparently.
I do arrest you, sir: you hear the suit.
ANTIPHOLUS
I do obey thee till I give thee bail.
But, sirrah, you shall buy this sport as dear
As all the metal in your shop will answer.
Sir, sir, I will have law in Ephesus,
To your notorious shame; I doubt it not.
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse, from the bay
Master, there is a bark of Epidamnum
That stays but till her owner comes aboard,
And then, sir, she bears away. Our fraughtage, sir,
I have conveyd aboard; and I have bought
The oil, the balsamum and aqua-vitae.
The ship is in her trim; the merry wind
Blows fair from land: they stay for nought at all
But for their owner, master, and yourself.
ANTIPHOLUS
How now! a madman! Why, thou peevish sheep,
What ship of Epidamnum stays for me?
A ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou drunken slave, I sent thee for a rope;
And told thee to what purpose and what end.
You sent me for a ropes end as soon:
You sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
ANTIPHOLUS
I will debate this matter at more leisure
And teach your ears to list me with more heed.
To Adriana, villain, hie thee straight:
Give her this key, and tell her, in the desk
Thats coverd oer with Turkish tapestry,
There is a purse of ducats; let her send it:
Tell her I am arrested in the street
And that shall bail me; hie thee, slave, be gone!
On, officer, to prison till it come.
Exeunt Second Merchant, Angelo, Officer, and Antipholus of Ephesus
To Adriana! that is where we dined,
Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband:
She is too big, I hope, for me to compass.
Thither I must, although against my will,
For servants must their masters minds fulfil.
Exit
SCENE II. The house of ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus.
Enter ADRIANA and LUCIANA
Ah, Luciana, did he tempt thee so?
Mightst thou perceive austerely in his eye
That he did plead in earnest? yea or no?
Lookd he or red or pale, or sad or merrily?
What observation madest thou in this case
Of his hearts meteors tilting in his face?
First he denied you had in him no right.
He meant he did me none; the more my spite.
Then swore he that he was a stranger here.
And true he swore, though yet forsworn he were.
Then pleaded I for you.
And what said he?
That love I beggd for you he beggd of me.
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love?
With words that in an honest suit might move.
First he did praise my beauty, then my speech.
Didst speak him fair?
Have patience, I beseech.
I cannot, nor I will not, hold me still;
My tongue, though not my heart, shall have his will.
He is deformed, crooked, old and sere,
Ill-faced, worse bodied, shapeless everywhere;
Vicious, ungentle, foolish, blunt, unkind;
Stigmatical in making, worse in mind.
Who would be jealous then of such a one?
No evil lost is waild when it is gone.
Ah, but I think him better than I say,
And yet would herein others eyes were worse.
Far from her nest the lapwing cries away:
My heart prays for him, though my tongue do curse.
Enter DROMIO of Syracuse
Here! go; the desk, the purse! sweet, now, make haste.
How hast thou lost thy breath?
By running fast.
Where is thy master, Dromio? is he well?
No, hes in Tartar limbo, worse than hell.
A devil in an everlasting garment hath him;
One whose hard heart is buttond up with steel;
A fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough;
A wolf, nay, worse, a fellow all in buff;
A back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that
countermands
The passages of alleys, creeks and narrow lands;
A hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well;
One that before the judgement carries poor souls to hell.
Why, man, what is the matter?
I do not know the matter: he is rested on the case.
What, is he arrested? Tell me at whose suit.
I know not at whose suit he is arrested well;
But hes in a suit of buff which rested him, that can I tell.
Will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?
Go fetch it, sister.
Exit Luciana
This I wonder at,
That he, unknown to me, should be in debt.
Tell me, was he arrested on a band?
Not on a band, but on a stronger thing;
A chain, a chain! Do you not hear it ring?
What, the chain?
No, no, the bell: tis time that I were gone:
It was two ere I left him, and now the clock
strikes one.
The hours come back! that did I never hear.
O, yes; if any hour meet a sergeant, a turns back for
very fear.
As if Time were in debt! how fondly dost thou reason!
Time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than hes
worth, to season.
Nay, hes a thief too: have you not heard men say
That Time comes stealing on by night and day?
If Time be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way,
Hath he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?
Re-enter LUCIANA with a purse
Go, Dromio; theres the money, bear it straight;
And bring thy master home immediately.
Come, sister: I am pressd down with conceit--
Conceit, my comfort and my injury.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A public place.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse
ANTIPHOLUS
Theres not a man I meet but doth salute me
As if I were their well-acquainted friend;
And every one doth call me by my name.
Some tender money to me; some invite me;
Some other give me thanks for kindnesses;
Some offer me commodities to buy:
Even now a tailor calld me in his shop
And showd me silks that he had bought for me,
And therewithal took measure of my body.
Sure, these are but imaginary wiles
And Lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
Enter DROMIO OF SYRACUSE
Master, heres the gold you sent me for. What, have
you got the picture of old Adam new-apparelled?
ANTIPHOLUS
What gold is this? what Adam dost thou mean?
Not that Adam that kept the Paradise but that Adam
that keeps the prison: he that goes in the calfs
skin that was killed for the Prodigal; he that came
behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you
forsake your liberty.
ANTIPHOLUS
I understand thee not.
No? why, tis a plain case: he that went, like a
bass-viol, in a case of leather; the man, sir,
that, when gentlemen are tired, gives them a sob
and rests them; he, sir, that takes pity on decayed
men and gives them suits of durance; he that sets up
his rest to do more exploits with his mace than a
morris-pike.
ANTIPHOLUS
What, thou meanest an officer?
Ay, sir, the sergeant of the band, he that brings
any man to answer it that breaks his band; one that
thinks a man always going to bed, and says, God
give you good rest!
ANTIPHOLUS
Well, sir, there rest in your foolery. Is there any
Why, sir, I brought you word an hour since that the
bark Expedition put forth to-night; and then were
you hindered by the sergeant, to tarry for the hoy
Delay. Here are the angels that you sent for to
deliver you.
ANTIPHOLUS
The fellow is distract, and so am I;
And here we wander in illusions:
Some blessed power deliver us from hence!
Enter a Courtezan
Well met, well met, Master Antipholus.
I see, sir, you have found the goldsmith now:
Is that the chain you promised me to-day?
ANTIPHOLUS
Satan, avoid! I charge thee, tempt me not.
Master, is this Mistress Satan?
ANTIPHOLUS
It is the devil.
Nay, she is worse, she is the devils dam; and here
she comes in the habit of a light wench: and thereof
comes that the wenches say God damn me; thats as
much to say God make me a light wench. It is
written, they appear to men like angels of light:
light is an effect of fire, and fire will burn;
ergo, light wenches will burn. Come not near her.
Your man and you are marvellous merry, sir.
Will you go with me? Well mend our dinner here?
Master, if you do, expect spoon-meat; or bespeak a
long spoon.
ANTIPHOLUS
Why, Dromio?
Marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with
the devil.
ANTIPHOLUS
Avoid then, fiend! what tellst thou me of supping?
Thou art, as you are all, a sorceress:
I conjure thee to leave me and be gone.
Give me the ring of mine you had at dinner,
Or, for my diamond, the chain you promised,
And Ill be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Some devils ask but the parings of ones nail,
A rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin,
A nut, a cherry-stone;
But she, more covetous, would have a chain.
Master, be wise: an if you give it her,
The devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.
I pray you, sir, my ring, or else the chain:
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so.
ANTIPHOLUS
Avaunt, thou witch! Come, Dromio, let us go.
Fly pride, says the peacock: mistress, that you know.
Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse
Now, out of doubt Antipholus is mad,
Else would he never so demean himself.
A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats,
And for the same he promised me a chain:
Both one and other he denies me now.
The reason that I gather he is mad,
Besides this present instance of his rage,
Is a mad tale he told to-day at dinner,
Of his own doors being shut against his entrance.
Belike his wife, acquainted with his fits,
On purpose shut the doors against his way.
My way is now to hie home to his house,
And tell his wife that, being lunatic,
He rushd into my house and took perforce
My ring away. This course I fittest choose;
For forty ducats is too much to lose.
Exit
SCENE IV. A street.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus and the Officer
ANTIPHOLUS
Fear me not, man; I will not break away:
Ill give thee, ere I leave thee, so much money,
To warrant thee, as I am rested for.
My wife is in a wayward mood to-day,
And will not lightly trust the messenger
That I should be attachd in Ephesus,
I tell you, twill sound harshly in her ears.
Enter DROMIO of Ephesus with a ropes-end
Here comes my man; I think he brings the money.
How now, sir! have you that I sent you for?
Heres that, I warrant you, will pay them all.
ANTIPHOLUS
But wheres the money?
Why, sir, I gave the money for the rope.
ANTIPHOLUS
Five hundred ducats, villain, for a rope?
Ill serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
ANTIPHOLUS
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home?
To a ropes-end, sir; and to that end am I returned.
ANTIPHOLUS
And to that end, sir, I will welcome you.
Beating him
Good sir, be patient.
Nay, tis for me to be patient; I am in adversity.
Good, now, hold thy tongue.
Nay, rather persuade him to hold his hands.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou whoreson, senseless villain!
I would I were senseless, sir, that I might not feel
your blows.
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows, and so is an
ass.
I am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long
ears. I have served him from the hour of my
nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his
hands for my service but blows. When I am cold, he
heats me with beating; when I am warm, he cools me
with beating; I am waked with it when I sleep;
raised with it when I sit; driven out of doors with
it when I go from home; welcomed home with it when
I return; nay, I bear it on my shoulders, as a
beggar wont her brat; and, I think when he hath
lamed me, I shall beg with it from door to door.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come, go along; my wife is coming yonder.
Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the Courtezan, and PINCH
Mistress, respice finem, respect your end; or
rather, the prophecy like the parrot, beware the
ropes-end.
ANTIPHOLUS
Wilt thou still talk?
Beating him
How say you now? is not your husband mad?
His incivility confirms no less.
Good Doctor Pinch, you are a conjurer;
Establish him in his true sense again,
And I will please you what you will demand.
Alas, how fiery and how sharp he looks!
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy!
Give me your hand and let me feel your pulse.
ANTIPHOLUS
There is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
Striking him
I charge thee, Satan, housed within this man,
To yield possession to my holy prayers
And to thy state of darkness hie thee straight:
I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven!
ANTIPHOLUS
Peace, doting wizard, peace! I am not mad.
O, that thou wert not, poor distressed soul!
ANTIPHOLUS
You minion, you, are these your customers?
Did this companion with the saffron face
Revel and feast it at my house to-day,
Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut
And I denied to enter in my house?
O husband, God doth know you dined at home;
Where would you had remaind until this time,
Free from these slanders and this open shame!
ANTIPHOLUS
Dined at home! Thou villain, what sayest thou?
Sir, sooth to say, you did not dine at home.
ANTIPHOLUS
Were not my doors lockd up and I shut out?
Perdie, your doors were lockd and you shut out.
ANTIPHOLUS
And did not she herself revile me there?
Sans fable, she herself reviled you there.
ANTIPHOLUS
Did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
Certes, she did; the kitchen-vestal scornd you.
ANTIPHOLUS
And did not I in rage depart from thence?
In verity you did; my bones bear witness,
That since have felt the vigour of his rage.
Ist good to soothe him in these contraries?
It is no shame: the fellow finds his vein,
And yielding to him humours well his frenzy.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou hast subornd the goldsmith to arrest me.
Alas, I sent you money to redeem you,
By Dromio here, who came in haste for it.
Money by me! heart and goodwill you might;
But surely master, not a rag of money.
ANTIPHOLUS
Wentst not thou to her for a purse of ducats?
He came to me and I deliverd it.
And I am witness with her that she did.
God and the rope-maker bear me witness
That I was sent for nothing but a rope!
Mistress, both man and master is possessd;
I know it by their pale and deadly looks:
They must be bound and laid in some dark room.
ANTIPHOLUS
Say, wherefore didst thou lock me forth to-day?
And why dost thou deny the bag of gold?
I did not, gentle husband, lock thee forth.
And, gentle master, I received no gold;
But I confess, sir, that we were lockd out.
Dissembling villain, thou speakst false in both.
ANTIPHOLUS
Dissembling harlot, thou art false in all;
And art confederate with a damned pack
To make a loathsome abject scorn of me:
But with these nails Ill pluck out these false eyes
That would behold in me this shameful sport.
Enter three or four, and offer to bind him. He strives
O, bind him, bind him! let him not come near me.
More company! The fiend is strong within him.
Ay me, poor man, how pale and wan he looks!
ANTIPHOLUS
What, will you murder me? Thou gaoler, thou,
I am thy prisoner: wilt thou suffer them
To make a rescue?
Masters, let him go
He is my prisoner, and you shall not have him.
Go bind this man, for he is frantic too.
They offer to bind Dromio of Ephesus
What wilt thou do, thou peevish officer?
Hast thou delight to see a wretched man
Do outrage and displeasure to himself?
He is my prisoner: if I let him go,
The debt he owes will be required of me.
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee:
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor,
And, knowing how the debt grows, I will pay it.
Good master doctor, see him safe conveyd
Home to my house. O most unhappy day!
ANTIPHOLUS
O most unhappy strumpet!
Master, I am here entered in bond for you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Out on thee, villain! wherefore dost thou mad me?
Will you be bound for nothing? be mad, good master:
cry The devil!
God help, poor souls, how idly do they talk!
Go bear him hence. Sister, go you with me.
Exeunt all but Adriana, Luciana, Officer and Courtezan
Say now, whose suit is he arrested at?
One Angelo, a goldsmith: do you know him?
I know the man. What is the sum he owes?
Two hundred ducats.
Say, how grows it due?
Due for a chain your husband had of him.
He did bespeak a chain for me, but had it not.
When as your husband all in rage to-day
Came to my house and took away my ring--
The ring I saw upon his finger now--
Straight after did I meet him with a chain.
It may be so, but I did never see it.
Come, gaoler, bring me where the goldsmith is:
I long to know the truth hereof at large.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse with his rapier drawn, and DROMIO of Syracuse
God, for thy mercy! they are loose again.
And come with naked swords.
Lets call more help to have them bound again.
Away! theyll kill us.
Exeunt all but Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse
ANTIPHOLUS
I see these witches are afraid of swords.
She that would be your wife now ran from you.
ANTIPHOLUS
Come to the Centaur; fetch our stuff from thence:
I long that we were safe and sound aboard.
Faith, stay here this night; they will surely do us
no harm: you saw they speak us fair, give us gold:
methinks they are such a gentle nation that, but for
the mountain of mad flesh that claims marriage of
