me, I could find in my heart to stay here still and
turn witch.
ANTIPHOLUS
I will not stay to-night for all the town;
Therefore away, to get our stuff aboard.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. A street before a Priory.
Enter Second Merchant and ANGELO
I am sorry, sir, that I have hinderd you;
But, I protest, he had the chain of me,
Though most dishonestly he doth deny it.
How is the man esteemed here in the city?
Of very reverend reputation, sir,
Of credit infinite, highly beloved,
Second to none that lives here in the city:
His word might bear my wealth at any time.
Speak softly; yonder, as I think, he walks.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse and DROMIO of Syracuse
Tis so; and that self chain about his neck
Which he forswore most monstrously to have.
Good sir, draw near to me, Ill speak to him.
Signior Antipholus, I wonder much
That you would put me to this shame and trouble;
And, not without some scandal to yourself,
With circumstance and oaths so to deny
This chain which now you wear so openly:
Beside the charge, the shame, imprisonment,
You have done wrong to this my honest friend,
Who, but for staying on our controversy,
Had hoisted sail and put to sea to-day:
This chain you had of me; can you deny it?
ANTIPHOLUS
I think I had; I never did deny it.
Yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.
ANTIPHOLUS
Who heard me to deny it or forswear it?
These ears of mine, thou knowst did hear thee.
Fie on thee, wretch! tis pity that thou livest
To walk where any honest man resort.
ANTIPHOLUS
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus:
Ill prove mine honour and mine honesty
Against thee presently, if thou darest stand.
I dare, and do defy thee for a villain.
They draw
Enter ADRIANA, LUCIANA, the Courtezan, and others
Hold, hurt him not, for Gods sake! he is mad.
Some get within him, take his sword away:
Bind Dromio too, and bear them to my house.
Run, master, run; for Gods sake, take a house!
This is some priory. In, or we are spoild!
Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Dromio of Syracuse to the Priory
Enter the Lady Abbess, AEMILIA
Be quiet, people. Wherefore throng you hither?
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence.
Let us come in, that we may bind him fast
And bear him home for his recovery.
I knew he was not in his perfect wits.
I am sorry now that I did draw on him.
How long hath this possession held the man?
This week he hath been heavy, sour, sad,
And much different from the man he was;
But till this afternoon his passion
Neer brake into extremity of rage.
Hath he not lost much wealth by wreck of sea?
Buried some dear friend? Hath not else his eye
Strayd his affection in unlawful love?
A sin prevailing much in youthful men,
Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing.
Which of these sorrows is he subject to?
To none of these, except it be the last;
Namely, some love that drew him oft from home.
You should for that have reprehended him.
Why, so I did.
Ay, but not rough enough.
As roughly as my modesty would let me.
Haply, in private.
And in assemblies too.
Ay, but not enough.
It was the copy of our conference:
In bed he slept not for my urging it;
At board he fed not for my urging it;
Alone, it was the subject of my theme;
In company I often glanced it;
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad.
And thereof came it that the man was mad.
The venom clamours of a jealous woman
Poisons more deadly than a mad dogs tooth.
It seems his sleeps were hinderd by thy railing,
And therefore comes it that his head is light.
Thou sayst his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings:
Unquiet meals make ill digestions;
Thereof the raging fire of fever bred;
And whats a fever but a fit of madness?
Thou sayst his sports were hinderd by thy brawls:
Sweet recreation barrd, what doth ensue
But moody and dull melancholy,
Kinsman to grim and comfortless despair,
And at her heels a huge infectious troop
Of pale distemperatures and foes to life?
In food, in sport and life-preserving rest
To be disturbd, would mad or man or beast:
The consequence is then thy jealous fits
Have scared thy husband from the use of wits.
She never reprehended him but mildly,
When he demeand himself rough, rude and wildly.
Why bear you these rebukes and answer not?
She did betray me to my own reproof.
Good people enter and lay hold on him.
No, not a creature enters in my house.
Then let your servants bring my husband forth.
Neither: he took this place for sanctuary,
And it shall privilege him from your hands
Till I have brought him to his wits again,
Or lose my labour in assaying it.
I will attend my husband, be his nurse,
Diet his sickness, for it is my office,
And will have no attorney but myself;
And therefore let me have him home with me.
Be patient; for I will not let him stir
Till I have used the approved means I have,
With wholesome syrups, drugs and holy prayers,
To make of him a formal man again:
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath,
A charitable duty of my order.
Therefore depart and leave him here with me.
I will not hence and leave my husband here:
And ill it doth beseem your holiness
To separate the husband and the wife.
Be quiet and depart: thou shalt not have him.
Exit
Complain unto the duke of this indignity.
Come, go: I will fall prostrate at his feet
And never rise until my tears and prayers
Have won his grace to come in person hither
And take perforce my husband from the abbess.
By this, I think, the dial points at five:
Anon, Im sure, the duke himself in person
Comes this way to the melancholy vale,
The place of death and sorry execution,
Behind the ditches of the abbey here.
Upon what cause?
To see a reverend Syracusian merchant,
Who put unluckily into this bay
Against the laws and statutes of this town,
Beheaded publicly for his offence.
See where they come: we will behold his death.
Kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey.
Enter DUKE SOLINUS, attended; AEGEON bareheaded; with the Headsman and other Officers
Yet once again proclaim it publicly,
If any friend will pay the sum for him,
He shall not die; so much we tender him.
Justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess!
She is a virtuous and a reverend lady:
It cannot be that she hath done thee wrong.
May it please your grace, Antipholus, my husband,
Whom I made lord of me and all I had,
At your important letters,--this ill day
A most outrageous fit of madness took him;
That desperately he hurried through the street,
With him his bondman, all as mad as he--
Doing displeasure to the citizens
By rushing in their houses, bearing thence
Rings, jewels, any thing his rage did like.
Once did I get him bound and sent him home,
Whilst to take order for the wrongs I went,
That here and there his fury had committed.
Anon, I wot not by what strong escape,
He broke from those that had the guard of him;
And with his mad attendant and himself,
Each one with ireful passion, with drawn swords,
Met us again and madly bent on us,
Chased us away; till, raising of more aid,
We came again to bind them. Then they fled
Into this abbey, whither we pursued them:
And here the abbess shuts the gates on us
And will not suffer us to fetch him out,
Nor send him forth that we may bear him hence.
Therefore, most gracious duke, with thy command
Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help.
Long since thy husband served me in my wars,
And I to thee engaged a princes word,
When thou didst make him master of thy bed,
To do him all the grace and good I could.
Go, some of you, knock at the abbey-gate
And bid the lady abbess come to me.
I will determine this before I stir.
Enter a Servant
O mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself!
My master and his man are both broke loose,
Beaten the maids a-row and bound the doctor
Whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire;
And ever, as it blazed, they threw on him
Great pails of puddled mire to quench the hair:
My master preaches patience to him and the while
His man with scissors nicks him like a fool,
And sure, unless you send some present help,
Between them they will kill the conjurer.
Peace, fool! thy master and his man are here,
And that is false thou dost report to us.
Mistress, upon my life, I tell you true;
I have not breathed almost since I did see it.
He cries for you, and vows, if he can take you,
To scorch your face and to disfigure you.
Cry within
Hark, hark! I hear him, mistress. fly, be gone!
Come, stand by me; fear nothing. Guard with halberds!
Ay me, it is my husband! Witness you,
That he is borne about invisible:
Even now we housed him in the abbey here;
And now hes there, past thought of human reason.
Enter ANTIPHOLUS of Ephesus and DROMIO of Ephesus
ANTIPHOLUS
Justice, most gracious duke, O, grant me justice!
Even for the service that long since I did thee,
When I bestrid thee in the wars and took
Deep scars to save thy life; even for the blood
That then I lost for thee, now grant me justice.
Unless the fear of death doth make me dote,
I see my son Antipholus and Dromio.
ANTIPHOLUS
Justice, sweet prince, against that woman there!
She whom thou gavest to me to be my wife,
That hath abused and dishonourd me
Even in the strength and height of injury!
Beyond imagination is the wrong
That she this day hath shameless thrown on me.
Discover how, and thou shalt find me just.
ANTIPHOLUS
This day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me,
While she with harlots feasted in my house.
A grievous fault! Say, woman, didst thou so?
No, my good lord: myself, he and my sister
To-day did dine together. So befall my soul
As this is false he burdens me withal!
Neer may I look on day, nor sleep on night,
But she tells to your highness simple truth!
O perjured woman! They are both forsworn:
In this the madman justly chargeth them.
ANTIPHOLUS
My liege, I am advised what I say,
Neither disturbed with the effect of wine,
Nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire,
Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad.
This woman lockd me out this day from dinner:
That goldsmith there, were he not packd with her,
Could witness it, for he was with me then;
Who parted with me to go fetch a chain,
Promising to bring it to the Porpentine,
Where Balthazar and I did dine together.
Our dinner done, and he not coming thither,
I went to seek him: in the street I met him
And in his company that gentleman.
There did this perjured goldsmith swear me down
That I this day of him received the chain,
Which, God he knows, I saw not: for the which
He did arrest me with an officer.
I did obey, and sent my peasant home
For certain ducats: he with none returnd
Then fairly I bespoke the officer
To go in person with me to my house.
By the way we met
My wife, her sister, and a rabble more
Of vile confederates. Along with them
They brought one Pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain,
A mere anatomy, a mountebank,
A threadbare juggler and a fortune-teller,
A needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch,
A dead-looking man: this pernicious slave,
Forsooth, took on him as a conjurer,
And, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse,
And with no face, as twere, outfacing me,
Cries out, I was possessd. Then all together
They fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence
And in a dark and dankish vault at home
There left me and my man, both bound together;
Till, gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder,
I gaind my freedom, and immediately
Ran hither to your grace; whom I beseech
To give me ample satisfaction
For these deep shames and great indignities.
My lord, in truth, thus far I witness with him,
That he dined not at home, but was lockd out.
But had he such a chain of thee or no?
He had, my lord: and when he ran in here,
These people saw the chain about his neck.
Besides, I will be sworn these ears of mine
Heard you confess you had the chain of him
After you first forswore it on the mart:
And thereupon I drew my sword on you;
And then you fled into this abbey here,
From whence, I think, you are come by miracle.
ANTIPHOLUS
I never came within these abbey-walls,
Nor ever didst thou draw thy sword on me:
I never saw the chain, so help me Heaven!
And this is false you burden me withal.
Why, what an intricate impeach is this!
I think you all have drunk of Circes cup.
If here you housed him, here he would have been;
If he were mad, he would not plead so coldly:
You say he dined at home; the goldsmith here
Denies that saying. Sirrah, what say you?
Sir, he dined with her there, at the Porpentine.
He did, and from my finger snatchd that ring.
ANTIPHOLUS
Tis true, my liege; this ring I had of her.
Sawst thou him enter at the abbey here?
As sure, my liege, as I do see your grace.
Why, this is strange. Go call the abbess hither.
I think you are all mated or stark mad.
Exit one to Abbess
Most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word:
Haply I see a friend will save my life
And pay the sum that may deliver me.
Speak freely, Syracusian, what thou wilt.
Is not your name, sir, calld Antipholus?
And is not that your bondman, Dromio?
Within this hour I was his bondman sir,
But he, I thank him, gnawd in two my cords:
Now am I Dromio and his man unbound.
I am sure you both of you remember me.
Ourselves we do remember, sir, by you;
For lately we were bound, as you are now
You are not Pinchs patient, are you, sir?
Why look you strange on me? you know me well.
I never saw you in my life till now.
O, grief hath changed me since you saw me last,
And careful hours with times deformed hand
Have written strange defeatures in my face:
But tell me yet, dost thou not know my voice?
ANTIPHOLUS
Neither.
Dromio, nor thou?
No, trust me, sir, nor I.
I am sure thou dost.
Ay, sir, but I am sure I do not; and whatsoever a
man denies, you are now bound to believe him.
Not know my voice! O times extremity,
Hast thou so crackd and splitted my poor tongue
In seven short years, that here my only son
Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares?
Though now this grained face of mine be hid
In sap-consuming winters drizzled snow,
And all the conduits of my blood froze up,
Yet hath my night of life some memory,
My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left,
My dull deaf ears a little use to hear:
All these old witnesses--I cannot err--
Tell me thou art my son Antipholus.
ANTIPHOLUS
I never saw my father in my life.
But seven years since, in Syracusa, boy,
Thou knowst we parted: but perhaps, my son,
Thou shamest to acknowledge me in misery.
ANTIPHOLUS
The duke and all that know me in the city
Can witness with me that it is not so
I neer saw Syracusa in my life.
I tell thee, Syracusian, twenty years
Have I been patron to Antipholus,
During which time he neer saw Syracusa:
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote.
Re-enter AEMILIA, with ANTIPHOLUS of Syracuse and DROMIO of Syracuse
Most mighty duke, behold a man much wrongd.
All gather to see them
I see two husbands, or mine eyes deceive me.
One of these men is Genius to the other;
And so of these. Which is the natural man,
And which the spirit? who deciphers them?
I, sir, am Dromio; command him away.
I, sir, am Dromio; pray, let me stay.
ANTIPHOLUS
AEgeon art thou not? or else his ghost?
O, my old master! who hath bound him here?
Whoever bound him, I will loose his bonds
And gain a husband by his liberty.
Speak, old AEgeon, if thou best the man
That hadst a wife once calld AEmilia
That bore thee at a burden two fair sons:
O, if thou best the same AEgeon, speak,
And speak unto the same AEmilia!
If I dream not, thou art AEmilia:
If thou art she, tell me where is that son
That floated with thee on the fatal raft?
By men of Epidamnum he and I
And the twin Dromio all were taken up;
But by and by rude fishermen of Corinth
By force took Dromio and my son from them
And me they left with those of Epidamnum.
What then became of them I cannot tell
I to this fortune that you see me in.
Why, here begins his morning story right;
These two Antipholuses, these two so like,
And these two Dromios, one in semblance,--
Besides her urging of her wreck at sea,--
These are the parents to these children,
Which accidentally are met together.
Antipholus, thou camest from Corinth first?
ANTIPHOLUS
No, sir, not I; I came from Syracuse.
Stay, stand apart; I know not which is which.
ANTIPHOLUS
I came from Corinth, my most gracious lord,--
And I with him.
ANTIPHOLUS
Brought to this town by that most famous warrior,
Duke Menaphon, your most renowned uncle.
Which of you two did dine with me to-day?
ANTIPHOLUS
I, gentle mistress.
And are not you my husband?
ANTIPHOLUS
No; I say nay to that.
ANTIPHOLUS
And so do I; yet did she call me so:
And this fair gentlewoman, her sister here,
Did call me brother.
To Luciana
What I told you then,
I hope I shall have leisure to make good;
If this be not a dream I see and hear.
That is the chain, sir, which you had of me.
ANTIPHOLUS
I think it be, sir; I deny it not.
ANTIPHOLUS
And you, sir, for this chain arrested me.
I think I did, sir; I deny it not.
I sent you money, sir, to be your bail,
By Dromio; but I think he brought it not.
No, none by me.
ANTIPHOLUS
This purse of ducats I received from you,
And Dromio, my man, did bring them me.
I see we still did meet each others man,
And I was taen for him, and he for me,
And thereupon these errors are arose.
ANTIPHOLUS
These ducats pawn I for my father here.
It shall not need; thy father hath his life.
Sir, I must have that diamond from you.
ANTIPHOLUS
There, take it; and much thanks for my good cheer.
Renowned duke, vouchsafe to take the pains
To go with us into the abbey here
And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes:
And all that are assembled in this place,
That by this sympathized one days error
Have sufferd wrong, go keep us company,
And we shall make full satisfaction.
Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail
Of you, my sons; and till this present hour
My heavy burden neer delivered.
The duke, my husband and my children both,
And you the calendars of their nativity,
Go to a gossips feast and go with me;
After so long grief, such festivity!
With all my heart, Ill gossip at this feast.
Exeunt all but Antipholus of Syracuse, Antipholus of Ephesus, Dromio of Syracuse and Dromio of Ephesus
Master, shall I fetch your stuff from shipboard?
ANTIPHOLUS
Dromio, what stuff of mine hast thou embarkd?
Your goods that lay at host, sir, in the Centaur.
ANTIPHOLUS
He speaks to me. I am your master, Dromio:
Come, go with us; well look to that anon:
Embrace thy brother there; rejoice with him.
Exeunt Antipholus of Syracuse and Antipholus of Ephesus
There is a fat friend at your masters house,
That kitchend me for you to-day at dinner:
She now shall be my sister, not my wife.
Methinks you are my glass, and not my brother:
I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth.
Will you walk in to see their gossiping?
Not I, sir; you are my elder.
Thats a question: how shall we try it?
Well draw cuts for the senior: till then lead thou first.
Nay, then, thus:
We came into the world like brother and brother;
And now lets go hand in hand, not one before another.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. Rome. A street.
Enter a company of mutinous Citizens, with staves, clubs, and other weapons
Before we proceed any further, hear me speak.
Speak, speak.
You are all resolved rather to die than to famish?
Resolved. resolved.
First, you know Caius Marcius is chief enemy to the people.
We knowt, we knowt.
Let us kill him, and well have corn at our own price.
Ist a verdict?
No more talking ont; let it be done: away, away!
One word, good citizens.
We are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good.
What authority surfeits on would relieve us: if they
would yield us but the superfluity, while it were
wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely;
but they think we are too dear: the leanness that
afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an
inventory to particularise their abundance; our
sufferance is a gain to them Let us revenge this with
our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know I
speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.
Would you proceed especially against Caius Marcius?
Against him first: hes a very dog to the commonalty.
Consider you what services he has done for his country?
Very well; and could be content to give him good
report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.
Nay, but speak not maliciously.
I say unto you, what he hath done famously, he did
it to that end: though soft-conscienced men can be
content to say it was for his country he did it to
please his mother and to be partly proud; which he
is, even till the altitude of his virtue.
What he cannot help in his nature, you account a
vice in him. You must in no way say he is covetous.
If I must not, I need not be barren of accusations;
he hath faults, with surplus, to tire in repetition.
Shouts within
What shouts are these? The other side o the city
is risen: why stay we prating here? to the Capitol!
Come, come.
Soft! who comes here?
Enter MENENIUS AGRIPPA
Worthy Menenius Agrippa; one that hath always loved
the people.
Hes one honest enough: would all the rest were so!
What works, my countrymen, in hand? where go you
With bats and clubs? The matter? speak, I pray you.
Our business is not unknown to the senate; they have
had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do,
which now well show em in deeds. They say poor
suitors have strong breaths: they shall know we
have strong arms too.
Why, masters, my good friends, mine honest neighbours,
Will you undo yourselves?
We cannot, sir, we are undone already.
I tell you, friends, most charitable care
Have the patricians of you. For your wants,
Your suffering in this dearth, you may as well
Strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them
Against the Roman state, whose course will on
The way it takes, cracking ten thousand curbs
Of more strong link asunder than can ever
Appear in your impediment. For the dearth,
The gods, not the patricians, make it, and
Your knees to them, not arms, must help. Alack,
You are transported by calamity
Thither where more attends you, and you slander
The helms o the state, who care for you like fathers,
When you curse them as enemies.
Care for us! True, indeed! They neer cared for us
yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses
crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to
support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act
established against the rich, and provide more
piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain
the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and
theres all the love they bear us.
Either you must
Confess yourselves wondrous malicious,
Or be accused of folly. I shall tell you
A pretty tale: it may be you have heard it;
But, since it serves my purpose, I will venture
To stale t a little more.
Well, Ill hear it, sir: yet you must not think to
fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an t please
you, deliver.
There was a time when all the bodys members
Rebelld against the belly, thus accused it:
That only like a gulf it did remain
I the midst o the body, idle and unactive,
Still cupboarding the viand, never bearing
Like labour with the rest, where the other instruments
Did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel,
And, mutually participate, did minister
Unto the appetite and affection common
Of the whole body. The belly answerd--
Well, sir, what answer made the belly?
Sir, I shall tell you. With a kind of smile,
Which neer came from the lungs, but even thus--
For, look you, I may make the belly smile
As well as speak--it tauntingly replied
To the discontented members, the mutinous parts
That envied his receipt; even so most fitly
As you malign our senators for that
They are not such as you.
Your bellys answer? What!
The kingly-crowned head, the vigilant eye,
The counsellor heart, the arm our soldier,
Our steed the leg, the tongue our trumpeter.
With other muniments and petty helps
In this our fabric, if that they--
What then?
Fore me, this fellow speaks! What then? what then?
Should by the cormorant belly be restraind,
Who is the sink o the body,--
Well, what then?
The former agents, if they did complain,
What could the belly answer?
I will tell you
If youll bestow a small--of what you have little--
Patience awhile, youll hear the bellys answer.
Yere long about it.
Note me this, good friend;
Your most grave belly was deliberate,
Not rash like his accusers, and thus answerd:
True is it, my incorporate friends, quoth he,
That I receive the general food at first,
Which you do live upon; and fit it is,
Because I am the store-house and the shop
Of the whole body: but, if you do remember,
I send it through the rivers of your blood,
Even to the court, the heart, to the seat o the brain;
And, through the cranks and offices of man,
The strongest nerves and small inferior veins
From me receive that natural competency
Whereby they live: and though that all at once,
You, my good friends,--this says the belly, mark me,--
Ay, sir; well, well.
Though all at once cannot
See what I do deliver out to each,
Yet I can make my audit up, that all
From me do back receive the flour of all,
And leave me but the bran. What say you tot?
It was an answer: how apply you this?
The senators of Rome are this good belly,
And you the mutinous members; for examine
Their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly
Touching the weal o the common, you shall find
No public benefit which you receive
But it proceeds or comes from them to you
And no way from yourselves. What do you think,
You, the great toe of this assembly?
I the great toe! why the great toe?
For that, being one o the lowest, basest, poorest,
Of this most wise rebellion, thou gost foremost:
Thou rascal, that art worst in blood to run,
Leadst first to win some vantage.
But make you ready your stiff bats and clubs:
Rome and her rats are at the point of battle;
The one side must have bale.
Enter CAIUS MARCIUS
Hail, noble Marcius!
Thanks. Whats the matter, you dissentious rogues,
That, rubbing the poor itch of your opinion,
Make yourselves scabs?
We have ever your good word.
He that will give good words to thee will flatter
Beneath abhorring. What would you have, you curs,
That like nor peace nor war? the one affrights you,
The other makes you proud. He that trusts to you,
Where he should find you lions, finds you hares;
Where foxes, geese: you are no surer, no,
Than is the coal of fire upon the ice,
Or hailstone in the sun. Your virtue is
To make him worthy whose offence subdues him
And curse that justice did it.
Who deserves greatness
Deserves your hate; and your affections are
A sick mans appetite, who desires most that
Which would increase his evil. He that depends
Upon your favours swims with fins of lead
And hews down oaks with rushes. Hang ye! Trust Ye?
With every minute you do change a mind,
And call him noble that was now your hate,
Him vile that was your garland. Whats the matter,
That in these several places of the city
You cry against the noble senate, who,
Under the gods, keep you in awe, which else
Would feed on one another? Whats their seeking?
For corn at their own rates; whereof, they say,
The city is well stored.
Hang em! They say!
Theyll sit by the fire, and presume to know
Whats done i the Capitol; whos like to rise,
Who thrives and who declines; side factions
and give out
Conjectural marriages; making parties strong
And feebling such as stand not in their liking
Below their cobbled shoes. They say theres
grain enough!
Would the nobility lay aside their ruth,
And let me use my sword, Ill make a quarry
With thousands of these quarterd slaves, as high
As I could pick my lance.
Nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded;
For though abundantly they lack discretion,
Yet are they passing cowardly. But, I beseech you,
What says the other troop?
They are dissolved: hang em!
They said they were an-hungry; sighd forth proverbs,
That hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat,
That meat was made for mouths, that the gods sent not
Corn for the rich men only: with these shreds
They vented their complainings; which being answerd,
And a petition granted them, a strange one--
To break the heart of generosity,
And make bold power look pale--they threw their caps
As they would hang them on the horns o the moon,
Shouting their emulation.
What is granted them?
Five tribunes to defend their vulgar wisdoms,
Of their own choice: ones Junius Brutus,
Sicinius Velutus, and I know not--Sdeath!
The rabble should have first unroofd the city,
Ere so prevaild with me: it will in time
Win upon power and throw forth greater themes
For insurrections arguing.
This is strange.
Go, get you home, you fragments!
Enter a Messenger, hastily
Wheres Caius Marcius?
Here: whats the matter?
The news is, sir, the Volsces are in arms.
I am glad on t: then we shall ha means to vent
Our musty superfluity. See, our best elders.
Enter COMINIUS, TITUS LARTIUS, and other Senators; JUNIUS BRUTUS and SICINIUS VELUTUS
Marcius, tis true that you have lately told us;
The Volsces are in arms.
They have a leader,
Tullus Aufidius, that will put you to t.
I sin in envying his nobility,
And were I any thing but what I am,
I would wish me only he.
You have fought together.
Were half to half the world by the ears and he.
Upon my party, Ild revolt to make
Only my wars with him: he is a lion
That I am proud to hunt.
Then, worthy Marcius,
Attend upon Cominius to these wars.
It is your former promise.
Sir, it is;
And I am constant. Titus Lartius, thou
Shalt see me once more strike at Tullus face.
What, art thou stiff? standst out?
No, Caius Marcius;
Ill lean upon one crutch and fight with tother,
Ere stay behind this business.
O, true-bred!
Your company to the Capitol; where, I know,
Our greatest friends attend us.
[To COMINIUS]                Lead you on.
To MARCIUS
Right worthy you priority.
Noble Marcius!
[To the Citizens]  Hence to your homes; be gone!
Nay, let them follow:
The Volsces have much corn; take these rats thither
To gnaw their garners. Worshipful mutiners,
Your valour puts well forth: pray, follow.
Citizens steal away. Exeunt all but SICINIUS and BRUTUS
Was ever man so proud as is this Marcius?
He has no equal.
When we were chosen tribunes for the people,--
Markd you his lip and eyes?
Nay. but his taunts.
Being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.
Be-mock the modest moon.
The present wars devour him: he is grown
Too proud to be so valiant.
Such a nature,
Tickled with good success, disdains the shadow
Which he treads on at noon: but I do wonder
His insolence can brook to be commanded
Under Cominius.
Fame, at the which he aims,
In whom already hes well graced, can not
Better be held nor more attaind than by
A place below the first: for what miscarries
Shall be the generals fault, though he perform
To the utmost of a man, and giddy censure
Will then cry out of Marcius O if he
Had borne the business!
Besides, if things go well,
Opinion that so sticks on Marcius shall
Of his demerits rob Cominius.
Come:
Half all Cominius honours are to Marcius.
Though Marcius earned them not, and all his faults
To Marcius shall be honours, though indeed
In aught he merit not.
Lets hence, and hear
How the dispatch is made, and in what fashion,
More than his singularity, he goes
Upon this present action.
Lets along.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Corioli. The Senate-house.
Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS and certain Senators
So, your opinion is, Aufidius,
That they of Rome are entered in our counsels
And know how we proceed.
Is it not yours?
What ever have been thought on in this state,
That could be brought to bodily act ere Rome
Had circumvention? Tis not four days gone
Since I heard thence; these are the words: I think
I have the letter here; yes, here it is.
Reads
They have pressd a power, but it is not known
Whether for east or west: the dearth is great;
The people mutinous; and it is rumourd,
Cominius, Marcius your old enemy,
Who is of Rome worse hated than of you,
And Titus Lartius, a most valiant Roman,
These three lead on this preparation
Whither tis bent: most likely tis for you:
Consider of it.
Our armys in the field
We never yet made doubt but Rome was ready
To answer us.
Nor did you think it folly
To keep your great pretences veild till when
They needs must show themselves; which
in the hatching,
It seemd, appeard to Rome. By the discovery.
We shall be shortend in our aim, which was
To take in many towns ere almost Rome
Should know we were afoot.
Noble Aufidius,
Take your commission; hie you to your bands:
Let us alone to guard Corioli:
If they set down before s, for the remove
Bring your army; but, I think, youll find
Theyve not prepared for us.
O, doubt not that;
I speak from certainties. Nay, more,
Some parcels of their power are forth already,
And only hitherward. I leave your honours.
If we and Caius Marcius chance to meet,
Tis sworn between us we shall ever strike
Till one can do no more.
The gods assist you!
And keep your honours safe!
Farewell.
Farewell.
Farewell.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Rome. A room in Marcius house.
Enter VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIAthey set them down on two low stools, and sew
I pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a
more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, I
should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he
won honour than in the embracements of his bed where
he would show most love. When yet he was but
tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when
youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when
for a day of kings entreaties a mother should not
sell him an hour from her beholding, I, considering
how honour would become such a person. that it was
no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if
renown made it not stir, was pleased to let him seek
danger where he was like to find fame. To a cruel
war I sent him; from whence he returned, his brows
bound with oak. I tell thee, daughter, I sprang not
more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child
than now in first seeing he had proved himself a
man.
But had he died in the business, madam; how then?
Then his good report should have been my son; I
therein would have found issue. Hear me profess
sincerely: had I a dozen sons, each in my love
alike and none less dear than thine and my good
Marcius, I had rather had eleven die nobly for their
country than one voluptuously surfeit out of action.
Enter a Gentlewoman
Madam, the Lady Valeria is come to visit you.
Beseech you, give me leave to retire myself.
Indeed, you shall not.
Methinks I hear hither your husbands drum,
See him pluck Aufidius down by the hair,
As children from a bear, the Volsces shunning him:
Methinks I see him stamp thus, and call thus:
Come on, you cowards! you were got in fear,
Though you were born in Rome: his bloody brow
With his maild hand then wiping, forth he goes,
Like to a harvest-man thats taskd to mow
Or all or lose his hire.
His bloody brow! O Jupiter, no blood!
Away, you fool! it more becomes a man
Than gilt his trophy: the breasts of Hecuba,
When she did suckle Hector, lookd not lovelier
Than Hectors forehead when it spit forth blood
At Grecian sword, contemning. Tell Valeria,
We are fit to bid her welcome.
Exit Gentlewoman
Heavens bless my lord from fell Aufidius!
Hell beat Aufidius head below his knee
And tread upon his neck.
Enter VALERIA, with an Usher and Gentlewoman
My ladies both, good day to you.
Sweet madam.
I am glad to see your ladyship.
How do you both? you are manifest house-keepers.
What are you sewing here? A fine spot, in good
faith. How does your little son?
I thank your ladyship; well, good madam.
He had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than
look upon his school-master.
O my word, the fathers son: Ill swear,tis a
very pretty boy. O my troth, I looked upon him o
Wednesday half an hour together: has such a
confirmed countenance. I saw him run after a gilded
butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go
again; and after it again; and over and over he
comes, and again; catched it again; or whether his
fall enraged him, or how twas, he did so set his
teeth and tear it; O, I warrant it, how he mammocked
it!
One on s fathers moods.
Indeed, la, tis a noble child.
A crack, madam.
Come, lay aside your stitchery; I must have you play
the idle husewife with me this afternoon.
No, good madam; I will not out of doors.
Not out of doors!
She shall, she shall.
Indeed, no, by your patience; Ill not over the
threshold till my lord return from the wars.
Fie, you confine yourself most unreasonably: come,
you must go visit the good lady that lies in.
I will wish her speedy strength, and visit her with
my prayers; but I cannot go thither.
Why, I pray you?
Tis not to save labour, nor that I want love.
You would be another Penelope: yet, they say, all
the yarn she spun in Ulysses absence did but fill
Ithaca full of moths. Come; I would your cambric
were sensible as your finger, that you might leave
pricking it for pity. Come, you shall go with us.
No, good madam, pardon me; indeed, I will not forth.
In truth, la, go with me; and Ill tell you
excellent news of your husband.
O, good madam, there can be none yet.
Verily, I do not jest with you; there came news from
him last night.
Indeed, madam?
In earnest, its true; I heard a senator speak it.
Thus it is: the Volsces have an army forth; against
whom Cominius the general is gone, with one part of
our Roman power: your lord and Titus Lartius are set
down before their city Corioli; they nothing doubt
prevailing and to make it brief wars. This is true,
on mine honour; and so, I pray, go with us.
Give me excuse, good madam; I will obey you in every
thing hereafter.
Let her alone, lady: as she is now, she will but
disease our better mirth.
In troth, I think she would. Fare you well, then.
Come, good sweet lady. Prithee, Virgilia, turn thy
solemness out o door. and go along with us.
No, at a word, madam; indeed, I must not. I wish
you much mirth.
Well, then, farewell.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Before Corioli.
Enter, with drum and colours, MARCIUS, TITUS  LARTIUS, Captains and Soldiers. To them a Messenger
Yonder comes news. A wager they have met.
My horse to yours, no.
Tis done.
Agreed.
Say, has our general met the enemy?
They lie in view; but have not spoke as yet.
So, the good horse is mine.
Ill buy him of you.
No, Ill nor sell nor give him: lend you him I will
For half a hundred years. Summon the town.
How far off lie these armies?
Within this mile and half.
Then shall we hear their larum, and they ours.
Now, Mars, I prithee, make us quick in work,
That we with smoking swords may march from hence,
To help our fielded friends! Come, blow thy blast.
They sound a parley. Enter two Senators with others on the walls
Tutus Aufidius, is he within your walls?
No, nor a man that fears you less than he,
Thats lesser than a little.
Drums afar off
Hark! our drums
Are bringing forth our youth. Well break our walls,
Rather than they shall pound us up: our gates,
Which yet seem shut, we, have but pinnd with rushes;
Theyll open of themselves.
Alarum afar off
Hark you. far off!
There is Aufidius; list, what work he makes
Amongst your cloven army.
O, they are at it!
Their noise be our instruction. Ladders, ho!
Enter the army of the Volsces
They fear us not, but issue forth their city.
Now put your shields before your hearts, and fight
With hearts more proof than shields. Advance,
brave Titus:
They do disdain us much beyond our thoughts,
Which makes me sweat with wrath. Come on, my fellows:
