He that retires Ill take him for a Volsce,
And he shall feel mine edge.
Alarum. The Romans are beat back to their trenches. Re-enter MARCIUS cursing
All the contagion of the south light on you,
You shames of Rome! you herd of--Boils and plagues
Plaster you oer, that you may be abhorrd
Further than seen and one infect another
Against the wind a mile! You souls of geese,
That bear the shapes of men, how have you run
From slaves that apes would beat! Pluto and hell!
All hurt behind; backs red, and faces pale
With flight and agued fear! Mend and charge home,
Or, by the fires of heaven, Ill leave the foe
And make my wars on you: look tot: come on;
If youll stand fast, well beat them to their wives,
As they us to our trenches followed.
Another alarum. The Volsces fly, and MARCIUS follows them to the gates
So, now the gates are ope: now prove good seconds:
Tis for the followers fortune widens them,
Not for the fliers: mark me, and do the like.
Enters the gates
Fool-hardiness; not I.
Nor I.
MARCIUS is shut in
See, they have shut him in.
To the pot, I warrant him.
Alarum continues
Re-enter TITUS LARTIUS
What is become of Marcius?
Slain, sir, doubtless.
Following the fliers at the very heels,
With them he enters; who, upon the sudden,
Clappd to their gates: he is himself alone,
To answer all the city.
O noble fellow!
Who sensibly outdares his senseless sword,
And, when it bows, stands up. Thou art left, Marcius:
A carbuncle entire, as big as thou art,
Were not so rich a jewel. Thou wast a soldier
Even to Catos wish, not fierce and terrible
Only in strokes; but, with thy grim looks and
The thunder-like percussion of thy sounds,
Thou madst thine enemies shake, as if the world
Were feverous and did tremble.
Re-enter MARCIUS, bleeding, assaulted by the enemy
Look, sir.
O,tis Marcius!
Lets fetch him off, or make remain alike.
They fight, and all enter the city
SCENE V. Corioli. A street.
Enter certain Romans, with spoils
This will I carry to Rome.
And I this.
A murrain ont! I took this for silver.
Alarum continues still afar off
Enter MARCIUS and TITUS LARTIUS with a trumpet
See here these movers that do prize their hours
At a crackd drachm! Cushions, leaden spoons,
Irons of a doit, doublets that hangmen would
Bury with those that wore them, these base slaves,
Ere yet the fight be done, pack up: down with them!
And hark, what noise the general makes! To him!
There is the man of my souls hate, Aufidius,
Piercing our Romans: then, valiant Titus, take
Convenient numbers to make good the city;
Whilst I, with those that have the spirit, will haste
To help Cominius.
Worthy sir, thou bleedst;
Thy exercise hath been too violent for
A second course of fight.
Sir, praise me not;
My work hath yet not warmd me: fare you well:
The blood I drop is rather physical
Than dangerous to me: to Aufidius thus
I will appear, and fight.
Now the fair goddess, Fortune,
Fall deep in love with thee; and her great charms
Misguide thy opposers swords! Bold gentleman,
Prosperity be thy page!
Thy friend no less
Than those she placeth highest! So, farewell.
Thou worthiest Marcius!
Exit MARCIUS
Go, sound thy trumpet in the market-place;
Call thither all the officers o the town,
Where they shall know our mind: away!
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Near the camp of Cominius.
Enter COMINIUS, as it were in retire, with soldiers
Breathe you, my friends: well fought;
we are come off
Like Romans, neither foolish in our stands,
Nor cowardly in retire: believe me, sirs,
We shall be charged again. Whiles we have struck,
By interims and conveying gusts we have heard
The charges of our friends. Ye Roman gods!
Lead their successes as we wish our own,
That both our powers, with smiling
fronts encountering,
May give you thankful sacrifice.
Enter a Messenger
Thy news?
The citizens of Corioli have issued,
And given to Lartius and to Marcius battle:
I saw our party to their trenches driven,
And then I came away.
Though thou speakst truth,
Methinks thou speakst not well.
How long ist since?
Above an hour, my lord.
Tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums:
How couldst thou in a mile confound an hour,
And bring thy news so late?
Spies of the Volsces
Held me in chase, that I was forced to wheel
Three or four miles about, else had I, sir,
Half an hour since brought my report.
Whos yonder,
That does appear as he were flayd? O gods
He has the stamp of Marcius; and I have
Before-time seen him thus.
[Within]                 Come I too late?
The shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour
More than I know the sound of Marcius tongue
From every meaner man.
Enter MARCIUS
Come I too late?
Ay, if you come not in the blood of others,
But mantled in your own.
O, let me clip ye
In arms as sound as when I wood, in heart
As merry as when our nuptial day was done,
And tapers burnd to bedward!
Flower of warriors,
How is it with Titus Lartius?
As with a man busied about decrees:
Condemning some to death, and some to exile;
Ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other;
Holding Corioli in the name of Rome,
Even like a fawning greyhound in the leash,
To let him slip at will.
Where is that slave
Which told me they had beat you to your trenches?
Where is he? call him hither.
Let him alone;
He did inform the truth: but for our gentlemen,
The common file--a plague! tribunes for them!--
The mouse neer shunnd the cat as they did budge
From rascals worse than they.
But how prevaild you?
Will the time serve to tell? I do not think.
Where is the enemy? are you lords o the field?
If not, why cease you till you are so?
Marcius,
We have at disadvantage fought and did
Retire to win our purpose.
How lies their battle? know you on which side
They have placed their men of trust?
As I guess, Marcius,
Their bands i the vaward are the Antiates,
Of their best trust; oer them Aufidius,
Their very heart of hope.
I do beseech you,
By all the battles wherein we have fought,
By the blood we have shed together, by the vows
We have made to endure friends, that you directly
Set me against Aufidius and his Antiates;
And that you not delay the present, but,
Filling the air with swords advanced and darts,
We prove this very hour.
Though I could wish
You were conducted to a gentle bath
And balms applied to, you, yet dare I never
Deny your asking: take your choice of those
That best can aid your action.
Those are they
That most are willing. If any such be here--
As it were sin to doubt--that love this painting
Wherein you see me smeard; if any fear
Lesser his person than an ill report;
If any think brave death outweighs bad life
And that his countrys dearer than himself;
Let him alone, or so many so minded,
Wave thus, to express his disposition,
And follow Marcius.
They all shout and wave their swords, take him up in their arms, and cast up their caps
O, me alone! make you a sword of me?
If these shows be not outward, which of you
But is four Volsces? none of you but is
Able to bear against the great Aufidius
A shield as hard as his. A certain number,
Though thanks to all, must I select
from all: the rest
Shall bear the business in some other fight,
As cause will be obeyd. Please you to march;
And four shall quickly draw out my command,
Which men are best inclined.
March on, my fellows:
Make good this ostentation, and you shall
Divide in all with us.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. The gates of Corioli.
TITUS LARTIUS, having set a guard upon  Corioli, going with drum and trumpet toward  COMINIUS and CAIUS MARCIUS, enters with Lieutenant, other Soldiers, and a Scout
So, let the ports be guarded: keep your duties,
As I have set them down. If I do send, dispatch
Those centuries to our aid: the rest will serve
For a short holding: if we lose the field,
We cannot keep the town.
Fear not our care, sir.
Hence, and shut your gates upons.
Our guider, come; to the Roman camp conduct us.
Exeunt
SCENE VIII. A field of battle.
Alarum as in battle. Enter, from opposite sides, MARCIUS and AUFIDIUS
Ill fight with none but thee; for I do hate thee
Worse than a promise-breaker.
We hate alike:
Not Afric owns a serpent I abhor
More than thy fame and envy. Fix thy foot.
Let the first budger die the others slave,
And the gods doom him after!
If I fly, Marcius,
Holloa me like a hare.
Within these three hours, Tullus,
Alone I fought in your Corioli walls,
And made what work I pleased: tis not my blood
Wherein thou seest me maskd; for thy revenge
Wrench up thy power to the highest.
Wert thou the Hector
That was the whip of your braggd progeny,
Thou shouldst not scape me here.
They fight, and certain Volsces come to the aid of  AUFIDIUS. MARCIUS fights till they be driven in breathless
Officious, and not valiant, you have shamed me
In your condemned seconds.
Exeunt
SCENE IX. The Roman camp.
Flourish. Alarum. A retreat is sounded. Flourish.  Enter, from one side, COMINIUS with the Romans; from the other side, MARCIUS, with his arm in a scarf
If I should tell thee oer this thy days work,
Thouldst not believe thy deeds: but Ill report it
Where senators shall mingle tears with smiles,
Where great patricians shall attend and shrug,
I the end admire, where ladies shall be frighted,
And, gladly quaked, hear more; where the
dull tribunes,
That, with the fusty plebeians, hate thine honours,
Shall say against their hearts We thank the gods
Our Rome hath such a soldier.
Yet camest thou to a morsel of this feast,
Having fully dined before.
Enter TITUS LARTIUS, with his power, from the pursuit
O general,
Here is the steed, we the caparison:
Hadst thou beheld--
Pray now, no more: my mother,
Who has a charter to extol her blood,
When she does praise me grieves me. I have done
As you have done; thats what I can; induced
As you have been; thats for my country:
He that has but effected his good will
Hath overtaen mine act.
You shall not be
The grave of your deserving; Rome must know
The value of her own: twere a concealment
Worse than a theft, no less than a traducement,
To hide your doings; and to silence that,
Which, to the spire and top of praises vouchd,
Would seem but modest: therefore, I beseech you
In sign of what you are, not to reward
What you have done--before our army hear me.
I have some wounds upon me, and they smart
To hear themselves rememberd.
Should they not,
Well might they fester gainst ingratitude,
And tent themselves with death. Of all the horses,
Whereof we have taen good and good store, of all
The treasure in this field achieved and city,
We render you the tenth, to be taen forth,
Before the common distribution, at
Your only choice.
I thank you, general;
But cannot make my heart consent to take
A bribe to pay my sword: I do refuse it;
And stand upon my common part with those
That have beheld the doing.
A long flourish. They all cry Marcius! Marcius!  cast up their caps and lances: COMINIUS and LARTIUS stand bare
May these same instruments, which you profane,
Never sound more! when drums and trumpets shall
I the field prove flatterers, let courts and cities be
Made all of false-faced soothing!
When steel grows soft as the parasites silk,
Let him be made a coverture for the wars!
No more, I say! For that I have not washd
My nose that bled, or foild some debile wretch.--
Which, without note, heres many else have done,--
You shout me forth
In acclamations hyperbolical;
As if I loved my little should be dieted
In praises sauced with lies.
Too modest are you;
More cruel to your good report than grateful
To us that give you truly: by your patience,
If gainst yourself you be incensed, well put you,
Like one that means his proper harm, in manacles,
Then reason safely with you. Therefore, be it known,
As to us, to all the world, that Caius Marcius
Wears this wars garland: in token of the which,
My noble steed, known to the camp, I give him,
With all his trim belonging; and from this time,
For what he did before Corioli, call him,
With all the applause and clamour of the host,
CAIUS MARCIUS CORIOLANUS! Bear
The addition nobly ever!
Flourish. Trumpets sound, and drums
Caius Marcius Coriolanus!
I will go wash;
And when my face is fair, you shall perceive
Whether I blush or no: howbeit, I thank you.
I mean to stride your steed, and at all times
To undercrest your good addition
To the fairness of my power.
So, to our tent;
Where, ere we do repose us, we will write
To Rome of our success. You, Titus Lartius,
Must to Corioli back: send us to Rome
The best, with whom we may articulate,
For their own good and ours.
I shall, my lord.
The gods begin to mock me. I, that now
Refused most princely gifts, am bound to beg
Of my lord general.
Taket; tis yours. What ist?
I sometime lay here in Corioli
At a poor mans house; he used me kindly:
He cried to me; I saw him prisoner;
But then Aufidius was with in my view,
And wrath oerwhelmd my pity: I request you
To give my poor host freedom.
O, well beggd!
Were he the butcher of my son, he should
Be free as is the wind. Deliver him, Titus.
Marcius, his name?
By Jupiter! forgot.
I am weary; yea, my memory is tired.
Have we no wine here?
Go we to our tent:
The blood upon your visage dries; tis time
It should be lookd to: come.
Exeunt
SCENE X. The camp of the Volsces.
A flourish. Cornets. Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS, bloody, with two or three Soldiers
The town is taen!
Twill be deliverd back on good condition.
Condition!
I would I were a Roman; for I cannot,
Being a Volsce, be that I am. Condition!
What good condition can a treaty find
I the part that is at mercy? Five times, Marcius,
I have fought with thee: so often hast thou beat me,
And wouldst do so, I think, should we encounter
As often as we eat. By the elements,
If eer again I meet him beard to beard,
Hes mine, or I am his: mine emulation
Hath not that honour int it had; for where
I thought to crush him in an equal force,
True sword to sword, Ill potch at him some way
Or wrath or craft may get him.
Hes the devil.
Bolder, though not so subtle. My valours poisond
With only suffering stain by him; for him
Shall fly out of itself: nor sleep nor sanctuary,
Being naked, sick, nor fane nor Capitol,
The prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice,
Embarquements all of fury, shall lift up
Their rotten privilege and custom gainst
My hate to Marcius: where I find him, were it
At home, upon my brothers guard, even there,
Against the hospitable canon, would I
Wash my fierce hand ins heart. Go you to the city;
Learn how tis held; and what they are that must
Be hostages for Rome.
Will not you go?
I am attended at the cypress grove: I pray you--
Tis south the city mills--bring me word thither
How the world goes, that to the pace of it
I may spur on my journey.
I shall, sir.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Rome. A public place.
Enter MENENIUS with the two Tribunes of the people, SICINIUS and BRUTUS.
The augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.
Good or bad?
Not according to the prayer of the people, for they
love not Marcius.
Nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
Pray you, who does the wolf love?
The lamb.
Ay, to devour him; as the hungry plebeians would the
noble Marcius.
Hes a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.
Hes a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. You two
are old men: tell me one thing that I shall ask you.
Well, sir.
In what enormity is Marcius poor in, that you two
have not in abundance?
Hes poor in no one fault, but stored with all.
Especially in pride.
And topping all others in boasting.
This is strange now: do you two know how you are
censured here in the city, I mean of us o the
right-hand file? do you?
Why, how are we censured?
Because you talk of pride now,--will you not be angry?
Well, well, sir, well.
Why, tis no great matter; for a very little thief of
occasion will rob you of a great deal of patience:
give your dispositions the reins, and be angry at
your pleasures; at the least if you take it as a
pleasure to you in being so. You blame Marcius for
being proud?
We do it not alone, sir.
I know you can do very little alone; for your helps
are many, or else your actions would grow wondrous
single: your abilities are too infant-like for
doing much alone. You talk of pride: O that you
could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks,
and make but an interior survey of your good selves!
O that you could!
What then, sir?
Why, then you should discover a brace of unmeriting,
proud, violent, testy magistrates, alias fools, as
any in Rome.
Menenius, you are known well enough too.
I am known to be a humorous patrician, and one that
loves a cup of hot wine with not a drop of allaying
Tiber int; said to be something imperfect in
favouring the first complaint; hasty and tinder-like
upon too trivial motion; one that converses more
with the buttock of the night than with the forehead
of the morning: what I think I utter, and spend my
malice in my breath. Meeting two such wealsmen as
you are--I cannot call you Lycurguses--if the drink
you give me touch my palate adversely, I make a
crooked face at it. I cant say your worships have
delivered the matter well, when I find the ass in
compound with the major part of your syllables: and
though I must be content to bear with those that say
you are reverend grave men, yet they lie deadly that
tell you you have good faces. If you see this in
the map of my microcosm, follows it that I am known
well enough too? what barm can your bisson
conspectuities glean out of this character, if I be
known well enough too?
Come, sir, come, we know you well enough.
You know neither me, yourselves nor any thing. You
are ambitious for poor knaves caps and legs: you
wear out a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a
cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller;
and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a
second day of audience. When you are hearing a
matter between party and party, if you chance to be
pinched with the colic, you make faces like
mummers; set up the bloody flag against all
patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot,
dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled
by your hearing: all the peace you make in their
cause is, calling both the parties knaves. You are
a pair of strange ones.
Come, come, you are well understood to be a
perfecter giber for the table than a necessary
bencher in the Capitol.
Our very priests must become mockers, if they shall
encounter such ridiculous subjects as you are. When
you speak best unto the purpose, it is not worth the
wagging of your beards; and your beards deserve not
so honourable a grave as to stuff a botchers
cushion, or to be entombed in an asss pack-
saddle. Yet you must be saying, Marcius is proud;
who in a cheap estimation, is worth predecessors
since Deucalion, though peradventure some of the
best of em were hereditary hangmen. God-den to
your worships: more of your conversation would
infect my brain, being the herdsmen of the beastly
plebeians: I will be bold to take my leave of you.
BRUTUS and SICINIUS go aside
Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and VALERIA
How now, my as fair as noble ladies,--and the moon,
were she earthly, no nobler,--whither do you follow
your eyes so fast?
Honourable Menenius, my boy Marcius approaches; for
the love of Juno, lets go.
Ha! Marcius coming home!
Ay, worthy Menenius; and with most prosperous
approbation.
Take my cap, Jupiter, and I thank thee. Hoo!
Marcius coming home!
Nay,tis true.
Look, heres a letter from him: the state hath
another, his wife another; and, I think, theres one
at home for you.
I will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for
me!
Yes, certain, theres a letter for you; I sawt.
A letter for me! it gives me an estate of seven
years health; in which time I will make a lip at
the physician: the most sovereign prescription in
Galen is but empiricutic, and, to this preservative,
of no better report than a horse-drench. Is he
not wounded? he was wont to come home wounded.
O, no, no, no.
O, he is wounded; I thank the gods fort.
So do I too, if it be not too much: brings a
victory in his pocket? the wounds become him.
Ons brows: Menenius, he comes the third time home
with the oaken garland.
Has he disciplined Aufidius soundly?
Titus Lartius writes, they fought together, but
Aufidius got off.
And twas time for him too, Ill warrant him that:
an he had stayed by him, I would not have been so
fidiused for all the chests in Corioli, and the gold
thats in them. Is the senate possessed of this?
Good ladies, lets go. Yes, yes, yes; the senate
has letters from the general, wherein he gives my
son the whole name of the war: he hath in this
action outdone his former deeds doubly
In troth, theres wondrous things spoke of him.
Wondrous! ay, I warrant you, and not without his
true purchasing.
The gods grant them true!
True! pow, wow.
True! Ill be sworn they are true.
Where is he wounded?
To the Tribunes
God save your good worships! Marcius is coming
home: he has more cause to be proud. Where is he wounded?
I the shoulder and i the left arm there will be
large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall
stand for his place. He received in the repulse of
Tarquin seven hurts i the body.
One i the neck, and two i the thigh,--theres
nine that I know.
He had, before this last expedition, twenty-five
wounds upon him.
Now its twenty-seven: every gash was an enemys grave.
A shout and flourish
Hark! the trumpets.
These are the ushers of Marcius: before him he
carries noise, and behind him he leaves tears:
Death, that dark spirit, in s nervy arm doth lie;
Which, being advanced, declines, and then men die.
A sennet. Trumpets sound. Enter COMINIUS the  general, and TITUS LARTIUS; between them, CORIOLANUS,  crowned with an oaken garland; with Captains and Soldiers, and a Herald
Know, Rome, that all alone Marcius did fight
Within Corioli gates: where he hath won,
With fame, a name to Caius Marcius; these
In honour follows Coriolanus.
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!
Flourish
Welcome to Rome, renowned Coriolanus!
No more of this; it does offend my heart:
Pray now, no more.
Look, sir, your mother!
O,
You have, I know, petitiond all the gods
For my prosperity!
Kneels
Nay, my good soldier, up;
My gentle Marcius, worthy Caius, and
By deed-achieving honour newly named,--
What is it?--Coriolanus must I call thee?--
But O, thy wife!
My gracious silence, hail!
Wouldst thou have laughd had I come coffind home,
That weepst to see me triumph? Ay, my dear,
Such eyes the widows in Corioli wear,
And mothers that lack sons.
Now, the gods crown thee!
And live you yet?
To VALERIA
O my sweet lady, pardon.
I know not where to turn: O, welcome home:
And welcome, general: and yere welcome all.
A hundred thousand welcomes. I could weep
And I could laugh, I am light and heavy. Welcome.
A curse begin at very root ons heart,
That is not glad to see thee! You are three
That Rome should dote on: yet, by the faith of men,
We have some old crab-trees here
at home that will not
Be grafted to your relish. Yet welcome, warriors:
We call a nettle but a nettle and
The faults of fools but folly.
Ever right.
Menenius ever, ever.
Give way there, and go on!
[To VOLUMNIA and VIRGILIA]  Your hand, and yours:
Ere in our own house I do shade my head,
The good patricians must be visited;
From whom I have received not only greetings,
But with them change of honours.
I have lived
To see inherited my very wishes
And the buildings of my fancy: only
Theres one thing wanting, which I doubt not but
Our Rome will cast upon thee.
Know, good mother,
I had rather be their servant in my way,
Than sway with them in theirs.
On, to the Capitol!
Flourish. Cornets. Exeunt in state, as before. BRUTUS and SICINIUS come forward
All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him: your prattling nurse
Into a rapture lets her baby cry
While she chats him: the kitchen malkin pins
Her richest lockram bout her reechy neck,
Clambering the walls to eye him: stalls, bulks, windows,
Are smotherd up, leads filld, and ridges horsed
With variable complexions, all agreeing
In earnestness to see him: seld-shown flamens
Do press among the popular throngs and puff
To win a vulgar station: or veild dames
Commit the war of white and damask in
Their nicely-gawded cheeks to the wanton spoil
Of Phoebus burning kisses: such a pother
As if that whatsoever god who leads him
Were slily crept into his human powers
And gave him graceful posture.
On the sudden,
I warrant him consul.
Then our office may,
During his power, go sleep.
He cannot temperately transport his honours
From where he should begin and end, but will
Lose those he hath won.
In that theres comfort.
Doubt not
The commoners, for whom we stand, but they
Upon their ancient malice will forget
With the least cause these his new honours, which
That he will give them make I as little question
As he is proud to dot.
I heard him swear,
Were he to stand for consul, never would he
Appear i the market-place nor on him put
The napless vesture of humility;
Nor showing, as the manner is, his wounds
To the people, beg their stinking breaths.
Tis right.
It was his word: O, he would miss it rather
Than carry it but by the suit of the gentry to him,
And the desire of the nobles.
I wish no better
Than have him hold that purpose and to put it
In execution.
Tis most like he will.
It shall be to him then as our good wills,
A sure destruction.
So it must fall out
To him or our authorities. For an end,
We must suggest the people in what hatred
He still hath held them; that tos power he would
Have made them mules, silenced their pleaders and
Dispropertied their freedoms, holding them,
In human action and capacity,
Of no more soul nor fitness for the world
Than camels in the war, who have their provand
Only for bearing burdens, and sore blows
For sinking under them.
This, as you say, suggested
At some time when his soaring insolence
Shall touch the people--which time shall not want,
If he be put upon t; and thats as easy
As to set dogs on sheep--will be his fire
To kindle their dry stubble; and their blaze
Shall darken him for ever.
Enter a Messenger
Whats the matter?
You are sent for to the Capitol. Tis thought
That Marcius shall be consul:
I have seen the dumb men throng to see him and
The blind to bear him speak: matrons flung gloves,
Ladies and maids their scarfs and handkerchers,
Upon him as he passd: the nobles bended,
As to Joves statue, and the commons made
A shower and thunder with their caps and shouts:
I never saw the like.
Lets to the Capitol;
And carry with us ears and eyes for the time,
But hearts for the event.
Have with you.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. The Capitol.
Enter two Officers, to lay cushions
Come, come, they are almost here. How many stand
for consulships?
Three, they say: but tis thought of every one
Coriolanus will carry it.
Thats a brave fellow; but hes vengeance proud, and
loves not the common people.
Faith, there had been many great men that have
flattered the people, who neer loved them; and there
be many that they have loved, they know not
wherefore: so that, if they love they know not why,
they hate upon no better a ground: therefore, for
Coriolanus neither to care whether they love or hate
him manifests the true knowledge he has in their
disposition; and out of his noble carelessness lets
them plainly seet.
If he did not care whether he had their love or no,
he waved indifferently twixt doing them neither
good nor harm: but he seeks their hate with greater
devotion than can render it him; and leaves
nothing undone that may fully discover him their
opposite. Now, to seem to affect the malice and
displeasure of the people is as bad as that which he
dislikes, to flatter them for their love.
He hath deserved worthily of his country: and his
ascent is not by such easy degrees as those who,
having been supple and courteous to the people,
bonneted, without any further deed to have them at
an into their estimation and report: but he hath so
planted his honours in their eyes, and his actions
in their hearts, that for their tongues to be
silent, and not confess so much, were a kind of
ingrateful injury; to report otherwise, were a
malice, that, giving itself the lie, would pluck
reproof and rebuke from every ear that heard it.
No more of him; he is a worthy man: make way, they
are coming.
A sennet. Enter, with actors before them, COMINIUS  the consul, MENENIUS, CORIOLANUS, Senators,  SICINIUS and BRUTUS. The Senators take their  places; the Tribunes take their Places by themselves. CORIOLANUS stands
Having determined of the Volsces and
To send for Titus Lartius, it remains,
As the main point of this our after-meeting,
To gratify his noble service that
Hath thus stood for his country: therefore,
please you,
Most reverend and grave elders, to desire
The present consul, and last general
In our well-found successes, to report
A little of that worthy work performd
By Caius Marcius Coriolanus, whom
We met here both to thank and to remember
With honours like himself.
Speak, good Cominius:
Leave nothing out for length, and make us think
Rather our states defective for requital
Than we to stretch it out.
To the Tribunes
Masters o the people,
We do request your kindest ears, and after,
Your loving motion toward the common body,
To yield what passes here.
We are convented
Upon a pleasing treaty, and have hearts
Inclinable to honour and advance
The theme of our assembly.
Which the rather
We shall be blest to do, if he remember
A kinder value of the people than
He hath hereto prized them at.
Thats off, thats off;
I would you rather had been silent. Please you
To hear Cominius speak?
Most willingly;
But yet my caution was more pertinent
Than the rebuke you give it.
He loves your people
But tie him not to be their bedfellow.
Worthy Cominius, speak.
CORIOLANUS offers to go away
Nay, keep your place.
Sit, Coriolanus; never shame to hear
What you have nobly done.
Your horrors pardon:
I had rather have my wounds to heal again
Than hear say how I got them.
Sir, I hope
My words disbenchd you not.
No, sir: yet oft,
When blows have made me stay, I fled from words.
You soothed not, therefore hurt not: but
your people,
I love them as they weigh.
Pray now, sit down.
I had rather have one scratch my head i the sun
When the alarum were struck than idly sit
To hear my nothings monsterd.
Exit
Masters of the people,
Your multiplying spawn how can he flatter--
Thats thousand to one good one--when you now see
He had rather venture all his limbs for honour
Than one ons ears to hear it? Proceed, Cominius.
I shall lack voice: the deeds of Coriolanus
Should not be utterd feebly. It is held
That valour is the chiefest virtue, and
Most dignifies the haver: if it be,
The man I speak of cannot in the world
Be singly counterpoised. At sixteen years,
When Tarquin made a head for Rome, he fought
Beyond the mark of others: our then dictator,
Whom with all praise I point at, saw him fight,
When with his Amazonian chin he drove
The bristled lips before him: be bestrid
An oer-pressd Roman and i the consuls view
Slew three opposers: Tarquins self he met,
And struck him on his knee: in that days feats,
When he might act the woman in the scene,
He proved best man i the field, and for his meed
Was brow-bound with the oak. His pupil age
Man-enterd thus, he waxed like a sea,
And in the brunt of seventeen battles since
He lurchd all swords of the garland. For this last,
Before and in Corioli, let me say,
I cannot speak him home: he stoppd the fliers;
And by his rare example made the coward
Turn terror into sport: as weeds before
A vessel under sail, so men obeyd
And fell below his stem: his sword, deaths stamp,
Where it did mark, it took; from face to foot
He was a thing of blood, whose every motion
Was timed with dying cries: alone he enterd
The mortal gate of the city, which he painted
With shunless destiny; aidless came off,
And with a sudden reinforcement struck
Corioli like a planet: now alls his:
When, by and by, the din of war gan pierce
His ready sense; then straight his doubled spirit
Re-quickend what in flesh was fatigate,
And to the battle came he; where he did
Run reeking oer the lives of men, as if
Twere a perpetual spoil: and till we calld
Both field and city ours, he never stood
To ease his breast with panting.
Worthy man!
He cannot but with measure fit the honours
Which we devise him.
Our spoils he kickd at,
And lookd upon things precious as they were
The common muck of the world: he covets less
Than misery itself would give; rewards
His deeds with doing them, and is content
To spend the time to end it.
Hes right noble:
Let him be calld for.
Call Coriolanus.
He doth appear.
Re-enter CORIOLANUS
The senate, Coriolanus, are well pleased
To make thee consul.
I do owe them still
My life and services.
It then remains
That you do speak to the people.
I do beseech you,
Let me oerleap that custom, for I cannot
Put on the gown, stand naked and entreat them,
For my wounds sake, to give their suffrage: please you
That I may pass this doing.
Sir, the people
Must have their voices; neither will they bate
One jot of ceremony.
Put them not tot:
Pray you, go fit you to the custom and
Take to you, as your predecessors have,
Your honour with your form.
It is apart
That I shall blush in acting, and might well
Be taken from the people.
Mark you that?
To brag unto them, thus I did, and thus;
Show them the unaching scars which I should hide,
As if I had received them for the hire
Of their breath only!
Do not stand upont.
We recommend to you, tribunes of the people,
Our purpose to them: and to our noble consul
Wish we all joy and honour.
To Coriolanus come all joy and honour!
Flourish of cornets. Exeunt all but SICINIUS and BRUTUS
You see how he intends to use the people.
May they perceives intent! He will require them,
As if he did contemn what he requested
Should be in them to give.
Come, well inform them
Of our proceedings here: on the marketplace,
I know, they do attend us.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. The Forum.
Enter seven or eight Citizens
Once, if he do require our voices, we ought not to deny him.
We may, sir, if we will.
We have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a
power that we have no power to do; for if he show us
his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our
tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if
he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him
our noble acceptance of them. Ingratitude is
monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful,
were to make a monster of the multitude: of the
which we being members, should bring ourselves to be
monstrous members.
And to make us no better thought of, a little help
will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he
himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.
We have been called so of many; not that our heads
are some brown, some black, some auburn, some bald,
but that our wits are so diversely coloured: and
truly I think if all our wits were to issue out of
one skull, they would fly east, west, north, south,
and their consent of one direct way should be at
once to all the points o the compass.
Think you so? Which way do you judge my wit would
fly?
Nay, your wit will not so soon out as another mans
will;tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but
if it were at liberty, twould, sure, southward.
Why that way?
To lose itself in a fog, where being three parts
melted away with rotten dews, the fourth would return
for conscience sake, to help to get thee a wife.
You are never without your tricks: you may, you may.
Are you all resolved to give your voices? But
thats no matter, the greater part carries it. I
say, if he would incline to the people, there was
never a worthier man.
Enter CORIOLANUS in a gown of humility, with MENENIUS
Here he comes, and in the gown of humility: mark his
behavior. We are not to stay all together, but to
come by him where he stands, by ones, by twos, and
by threes. Hes to make his requests by
particulars; wherein every one of us has a single
honour, in giving him our own voices with our own
tongues: therefore follow me, and I direct you how
you shall go by him.
Content, content.
Exeunt Citizens
O sir, you are not right: have you not known
The worthiest men have donet?
What must I say?
I Pray, sir--Plague upont! I cannot bring
My tongue to such a pace:--Look, sir, my wounds!
I got them in my countrys service, when
Some certain of your brethren roard and ran
From the noise of our own drums.
O me, the gods!
You must not speak of that: you must desire them
To think upon you.
Think upon me! hang em!
I would they would forget me, like the virtues
Which our divines lose by em.
Youll mar all:
Ill leave you: pray you, speak to em, I pray you,
In wholesome manner.
Exit
Bid them wash their faces
And keep their teeth clean.
Re-enter two of the Citizens
So, here comes a brace.
Re-enter a third Citizen
You know the cause, air, of my standing here.
We do, sir; tell us what hath brought you tot.
Mine own desert.
Your own desert!
Ay, but not mine own desire.
How not your own desire?
No, sir,twas never my desire yet to trouble the
poor with begging.
You must think, if we give you any thing, we hope to
gain by you.
Well then, I pray, your price o the consulship?
The price is to ask it kindly.
Kindly! Sir, I pray, let me hat: I have wounds to
show you, which shall be yours in private. Your
good voice, sir; what say you?
You shall ha it, worthy sir.
A match, sir. Theres in all two worthy voices
begged. I have your alms: adieu.
But this is something odd.
An twere to give again,--but tis no matter.
Exeunt the three Citizens
Re-enter two other Citizens
Pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your
voices that I may be consul, I have here the
customary gown.
You have deserved nobly of your country, and you
have not deserved nobly.
Your enigma?
You have been a scourge to her enemies, you have
been a rod to her friends; you have not indeed loved
the common people.
You should account me the more virtuous that I have
not been common in my love. I will, sir, flatter my
sworn brother, the people, to earn a dearer
estimation of them; tis a condition they account
gentle: and since the wisdom of their choice is
rather to have my hat than my heart, I will practise
the insinuating nod and be off to them most
counterfeitly; that is, sir, I will counterfeit the
bewitchment of some popular man and give it
