bountiful to the desirers. Therefore, beseech you,
I may be consul.
We hope to find you our friend; and therefore give
you our voices heartily.
You have received many wounds for your country.
I will not seal your knowledge with showing them. I
will make much of your voices, and so trouble you no further.
The gods give you joy, sir, heartily!
Exeunt
Most sweet voices!
Better it is to die, better to starve,
Than crave the hire which first we do deserve.
Why in this woolvish toge should I stand here,
To beg of Hob and Dick, that do appear,
Their needless vouches? Custom calls me tot:
What custom wills, in all things should we dot,
The dust on antique time would lie unswept,
And mountainous error be too highly heapt
For truth to oer-peer. Rather than fool it so,
Let the high office and the honour go
To one that would do thus. I am half through;
The one part sufferd, the other will I do.
Re-enter three Citizens more
Here come more voices.
Your voices: for your voices I have fought;
Watchd for your voices; for Your voices bear
Of wounds two dozen odd; battles thrice six
I have seen and heard of; for your voices have
Done many things, some less, some more your voices:
Indeed I would be consul.
He has done nobly, and cannot go without any honest
mans voice.
Therefore let him be consul: the gods give him joy,
and make him good friend to the people!
Amen, amen. God save thee, noble consul!
Exeunt
Worthy voices!
Re-enter MENENIUS, with BRUTUS and SICINIUS
You have stood your limitation; and the tribunes
Endue you with the peoples voice: remains
That, in the official marks invested, you
Anon do meet the senate.
Is this done?
The custom of request you have discharged:
The people do admit you, and are summond
To meet anon, upon your approbation.
Where? at the senate-house?
There, Coriolanus.
May I change these garments?
You may, sir.
That Ill straight do; and, knowing myself again,
Repair to the senate-house.
Ill keep you company. Will you along?
We stay here for the people.
Fare you well.
Exeunt CORIOLANUS and MENENIUS
He has it now, and by his looks methink
Tis warm at s heart.
With a proud heart he wore his humble weeds.
will you dismiss the people?
Re-enter Citizens
How now, my masters! have you chose this man?
He has our voices, sir.
We pray the gods he may deserve your loves.
Amen, sir: to my poor unworthy notice,
He mockd us when he beggd our voices.
Certainly
He flouted us downright.
No,tis his kind of speech: he did not mock us.
Not one amongst us, save yourself, but says
He used us scornfully: he should have showd us
His marks of merit, wounds received fors country.
Why, so he did, I am sure.
No, no; no man saw em.
He said he had wounds, which he could show
in private;
And with his hat, thus waving it in scorn,
I would be consul, says he: aged custom,
But by your voices, will not so permit me;
Your voices therefore. When we granted that,
Here was I thank you for your voices: thank you:
Your most sweet voices: now you have left
your voices,
I have no further with you. Was not this mockery?
Why either were you ignorant to seet,
Or, seeing it, of such childish friendliness
To yield your voices?
Could you not have told him
As you were lessond, when he had no power,
But was a petty servant to the state,
He was your enemy, ever spake against
Your liberties and the charters that you bear
I the body of the weal; and now, arriving
A place of potency and sway o the state,
If he should still malignantly remain
Fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might
Be curses to yourselves? You should have said
That as his worthy deeds did claim no less
Than what he stood for, so his gracious nature
Would think upon you for your voices and
Translate his malice towards you into love,
Standing your friendly lord.
Thus to have said,
As you were fore-advised, had touchd his spirit
And tried his inclination; from him pluckd
Either his gracious promise, which you might,
As cause had calld you up, have held him to
Or else it would have galld his surly nature,
Which easily endures not article
Tying him to aught; so putting him to rage,
You should have taen the advantage of his choler
And passd him unelected.
Did you perceive
He did solicit you in free contempt
When he did need your loves, and do you think
That his contempt shall not be bruising to you,
When he hath power to crush? Why, had your bodies
No heart among you? or had you tongues to cry
Against the rectorship of judgment?
Have you
Ere now denied the asker? and now again
Of him that did not ask, but mock, bestow
Your sued-for tongues?
Hes not confirmd; we may deny him yet.
And will deny him:
Ill have five hundred voices of that sound.
I twice five hundred and their friends to piece em.
Get you hence instantly, and tell those friends,
They have chose a consul that will from them take
Their liberties; make them of no more voice
Than dogs that are as often beat for barking
As therefore kept to do so.
Let them assemble,
And on a safer judgment all revoke
Your ignorant election; enforce his pride,
And his old hate unto you; besides, forget not
With what contempt he wore the humble weed,
How in his suit he scornd you; but your loves,
Thinking upon his services, took from you
The apprehension of his present portance,
Which most gibingly, ungravely, he did fashion
After the inveterate hate he bears you.
Lay
A fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured,
No impediment between, but that you must
Cast your election on him.
Say, you chose him
More after our commandment than as guided
By your own true affections, and that your minds,
Preoccupied with what you rather must do
Than what you should, made you against the grain
To voice him consul: lay the fault on us.
Ay, spare us not. Say we read lectures to you.
How youngly he began to serve his country,
How long continued, and what stock he springs of,
The noble house o the Marcians, from whence came
That Ancus Marcius, Numas daughters son,
Who, after great Hostilius, here was king;
Of the same house Publius and Quintus were,
That our beat water brought by conduits hither;
And  [Censorinus,]  nobly named so,
Twice being  [by the people chosen]  censor,
Was his great ancestor.
One thus descended,
That hath beside well in his person wrought
To be set high in place, we did commend
To your remembrances: but you have found,
Scaling his present bearing with his past,
That hes your fixed enemy, and revoke
Your sudden approbation.
Say, you neer had donet--
Harp on that still--but by our putting on;
And presently, when you have drawn your number,
Repair to the Capitol.
We will so: almost all
Repent in their election.
Exeunt Citizens
Let them go on;
This mutiny were better put in hazard,
Than stay, past doubt, for greater:
If, as his nature is, he fall in rage
With their refusal, both observe and answer
The vantage of his anger.
To the Capitol, come:
We will be there before the stream o the people;
And this shall seem, as partly tis, their own,
Which we have goaded onward.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. Rome. A street.
Cornets. Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS, all the Gentry, COMINIUS, TITUS LARTIUS, and other Senators
Tullus Aufidius then had made new head?
He had, my lord; and that it was which caused
Our swifter composition.
So then the Volsces stand but as at first,
Ready, when time shall prompt them, to make road.
Upons again.
They are worn, lord consul, so,
That we shall hardly in our ages see
Their banners wave again.
Saw you Aufidius?
On safe-guard he  came to me; and did curse
Against the Volsces, for they had so vilely
Yielded the town: he is retired to Antium.
Spoke he of me?
He did, my lord.
How? what?
How often he had met you, sword to sword;
That of all things upon the earth he hated
Your person most, that he would pawn his fortunes
To hopeless restitution, so he might
Be calld your vanquisher.
At Antium lives he?
At Antium.
I wish I had a cause to seek him there,
To oppose his hatred fully. Welcome home.
Enter SICINIUS and BRUTUS
Behold, these are the tribunes of the people,
The tongues o the common mouth: I do despise them;
For they do prank them in authority,
Against all noble sufferance.
Pass no further.
Ha! what is that?
It will be dangerous to go on: no further.
What makes this change?
The matter?
Hath he not passd the noble and the common?
Cominius, no.
Have I had childrens voices?
Tribunes, give way; he shall to the market-place.
The people are incensed against him.
Stop,
Or all will fall in broil.
Are these your herd?
Must these have voices, that can yield them now
And straight disclaim their tongues? What are
your offices?
You being their mouths, why rule you not their teeth?
Have you not set them on?
Be calm, be calm.
It is a purposed thing, and grows by plot,
To curb the will of the nobility:
Suffert, and live with such as cannot rule
Nor ever will be ruled.
Callt not a plot:
The people cry you mockd them, and of late,
When corn was given them gratis, you repined;
Scandald the suppliants for the people, calld them
Time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
Why, this was known before.
Not to them all.
Have you informd them sithence?
How! I inform them!
You are like to do such business.
Not unlike,
Each way, to better yours.
Why then should I be consul? By yond clouds,
Let me deserve so ill as you, and make me
Your fellow tribune.
You show too much of that
For which the people stir: if you will pass
To where you are bound, you must inquire your way,
Which you are out of, with a gentler spirit,
Or never be so noble as a consul,
Nor yoke with him for tribune.
Lets be calm.
The people are abused; set on. This paltering
Becomes not Rome, nor has Coriolanus
Deserved this so dishonourd rub, laid falsely
I the plain way of his merit.
Tell me of corn!
This was my speech, and I will speakt again--
Not now, not now.
Not in this heat, sir, now.
Now, as I live, I will. My nobler friends,
I crave their pardons:
For the mutable, rank-scented many, let them
Regard me as I do not flatter, and
Therein behold themselves: I say again,
In soothing them, we nourish gainst our senate
The cockle of rebellion, insolence, sedition,
Which we ourselves have ploughd for, sowd,
and scatterd,
By mingling them with us, the honourd number,
Who lack not virtue, no, nor power, but that
Which they have given to beggars.
Well, no more.
No more words, we beseech you.
How! no more!
As for my country I have shed my blood,
Not fearing outward force, so shall my lungs
Coin words till their decay against those measles,
Which we disdain should tatter us, yet sought
The very way to catch them.
You speak o the people,
As if you were a god to punish, not
A man of their infirmity.
Twere well
We let the people knowt.
What, what? his choler?
Choler!
Were I as patient as the midnight sleep,
By Jove, twould be my mind!
It is a mind
That shall remain a poison where it is,
Not poison any further.
Shall remain!
Hear you this Triton of the minnows? mark you
His absolute shall?
Twas from the canon.
Shall!
O good but most unwise patricians! why,
You grave but reckless senators, have you thus
Given Hydra here to choose an officer,
That with his peremptory shall, being but
The horn and noise o the monsters, wants not spirit
To say hell turn your current in a ditch,
And make your channel his? If he have power
Then vail your ignorance; if none, awake
Your dangerous lenity. If you are learnd,
Be not as common fools; if you are not,
Let them have cushions by you. You are plebeians,
If they be senators: and they are no less,
When, both your voices blended, the greatst taste
Most palates theirs. They choose their magistrate,
And such a one as he, who puts his shall,
His popular shall against a graver bench
Than ever frown in Greece. By Jove himself!
It makes the consuls base: and my soul aches
To know, when two authorities are up,
Neither supreme, how soon confusion
May enter twixt the gap of both and take
The one by the other.
Well, on to the market-place.
Whoever gave that counsel, to give forth
The corn o the storehouse gratis, as twas used
Sometime in Greece,--
Well, well, no more of that.
Though there the people had more absolute power,
I say, they nourishd disobedience, fed
The ruin of the state.
Why, shall the people give
One that speaks thus their voice?
Ill give my reasons,
More worthier than their voices. They know the corn
Was not our recompense, resting well assured
That neer did service fort: being pressd to the war,
Even when the navel of the state was touchd,
They would not thread the gates. This kind of service
Did not deserve corn gratis. Being i the war
Their mutinies and revolts, wherein they showd
Most valour, spoke not for them: the accusation
Which they have often made against the senate,
All cause unborn, could never be the motive
Of our so frank donation. Well, what then?
How shall this bisson multitude digest
The senates courtesy? Let deeds express
Whats like to be their words: we did request it;
We are the greater poll, and in true fear
They gave us our demands. Thus we debase
The nature of our seats and make the rabble
Call our cares fears; which will in time
Break ope the locks o the senate and bring in
The crows to peck the eagles.
Come, enough.
Enough, with over-measure.
No, take more:
What may be sworn by, both divine and human,
Seal what I end withal! This double worship,
Where one part does disdain with cause, the other
Insult without all reason, where gentry, title, wisdom,
Cannot conclude but by the yea and no
Of general ignorance,--it must omit
Real necessities, and give way the while
To unstable slightness: purpose so barrd,
it follows,
Nothing is done to purpose. Therefore, beseech you,--
You that will be less fearful than discreet,
That love the fundamental part of state
More than you doubt the change ont, that prefer
A noble life before a long, and wish
To jump a body with a dangerous physic
Thats sure of death without it, at once pluck out
The multitudinous tongue; let them not lick
The sweet which is their poison: your dishonour
Mangles true judgment and bereaves the state
Of that integrity which should becomet,
Not having the power to do the good it would,
For the in which doth controlt.
Has said enough.
Has spoken like a traitor, and shall answer
As traitors do.
Thou wretch, despite oerwhelm thee!
What should the people do with these bald tribunes?
On whom depending, their obedience fails
To the greater bench: in a rebellion,
When whats not meet, but what must be, was law,
Then were they chosen: in a better hour,
Let what is meet be said it must be meet,
And throw their power i the dust.
Manifest treason!
This a consul? no.
The aediles, ho!
Enter an AEdile
Let him be apprehended.
Go, call the people:
Exit AEdile
in whose name myself
Attach thee as a traitorous innovator,
A foe to the public weal: obey, I charge thee,
And follow to thine answer.
Hence, old goat!
Senators,  and CWell surety him.
Aged sir, hands off.
Hence, rotten thing! or I shall shake thy bones
Out of thy garments.
Help, ye citizens!
Enter a rabble of Citizens (Plebeians), with the AEdiles
On both sides more respect.
Heres he that would take from you all your power.
Seize him, AEdiles!
Down with him! down with him!
Senators,  and CWeapons, weapons, weapons!
They all bustle about CORIOLANUS, crying
Tribunes! Patricians! Citizens! What, ho!
Sicinius! Brutus! Coriolanus! Citizens!
Peace, peace, peace! Stay, hold, peace!
What is about to be? I am out of breath;
Confusions near; I cannot speak. You, tribunes
To the people! Coriolanus, patience!
Speak, good Sicinius.
Hear me, people; peace!
Lets hear our tribune: peace Speak, speak, speak.
You are at point to lose your liberties:
Marcius would have all from you; Marcius,
Whom late you have named for consul.
Fie, fie, fie!
This is the way to kindle, not to quench.
To unbuild the city and to lay all flat.
What is the city but the people?
True,
The people are the city.
By the consent of all, we were establishd
The peoples magistrates.
You so remain.
And so are like to do.
That is the way to lay the city flat;
To bring the roof to the foundation,
And bury all, which yet distinctly ranges,
In heaps and piles of ruin.
This deserves death.
Or let us stand to our authority,
Or let us lose it. We do here pronounce,
Upon the part o the people, in whose power
We were elected theirs, Marcius is worthy
Of present death.
Therefore lay hold of him;
Bear him to the rock Tarpeian, and from thence
Into destruction cast him.
AEdiles, seize him!
Yield, Marcius, yield!
Hear me one word;
Beseech you, tribunes, hear me but a word.
Peace, peace!
[To BRUTUS]  Be that you seem, truly your
countrys friend,
And temperately proceed to what you would
Thus violently redress.
Sir, those cold ways,
That seem like prudent helps, are very poisonous
Where the disease is violent. Lay hands upon him,
And bear him to the rock.
No, Ill die here.
Drawing his sword
Theres some among you have beheld me fighting:
Come, try upon yourselves what you have seen me.
Down with that sword! Tribunes, withdraw awhile.
Lay hands upon him.
Help Marcius, help,
You that be noble; help him, young and old!
Down with him, down with him!
In this mutiny, the Tribunes, the AEdiles, and the People, are beat in
Go, get you to your house; be gone, away!
All will be naught else.
Get you gone.
Stand fast;
We have as many friends as enemies.
Sham it be put to that?
The gods forbid!
I prithee, noble friend, home to thy house;
Leave us to cure this cause.
For tis a sore upon us,
You cannot tent yourself: be gone, beseech you.
Come, sir, along with us.
I would they were barbarians--as they are,
Though in Rome litterd--not Romans--as they are not,
Though calved i the porch o the Capitol--
Be gone;
Put not your worthy rage into your tongue;
One time will owe another.
On fair ground
I could beat forty of them.
I could myself
Take up a brace o the best of them; yea, the
two tribunes:
But now tis odds beyond arithmetic;
And manhood is calld foolery, when it stands
Against a falling fabric. Will you hence,
Before the tag return? whose rage doth rend
Like interrupted waters and oerbear
What they are used to bear.
Pray you, be gone:
Ill try whether my old wit be in request
With those that have but little: this must be patchd
With cloth of any colour.
Nay, come away.
Exeunt CORIOLANUS, COMINIUS, and others
This man has marrd his fortune.
His nature is too noble for the world:
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,
Or Jove fors power to thunder. His hearts his mouth:
What his breast forges, that his tongue must vent;
And, being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death.
A noise within
Heres goodly work!
I would they were abed!
I would they were in Tiber! What the vengeance!
Could he not speak em fair?
Re-enter BRUTUS and SICINIUS, with the rabble
Where is this viper
That would depopulate the city and
Be every man himself?
You worthy tribunes,--
He shall be thrown down the Tarpeian rock
With rigorous hands: he hath resisted law,
And therefore law shall scorn him further trial
Than the severity of the public power
Which he so sets at nought.
He shall well know
The noble tribunes are the peoples mouths,
And we their hands.
He shall, sure ont.
Sir, sir,--
Peace!
Do not cry havoc, where you should but hunt
With modest warrant.
Sir, how comest that you
Have holp to make this rescue?
Hear me speak:
As I do know the consuls worthiness,
So can I name his faults,--
Consul! what consul?
The consul Coriolanus.
He consul!
No, no, no, no, no.
If, by the tribunes leave, and yours, good people,
I may be heard, I would crave a word or two;
The which shall turn you to no further harm
Than so much loss of time.
Speak briefly then;
For we are peremptory to dispatch
This viperous traitor: to eject him hence
Were but one danger, and to keep him here
Our certain death: therefore it is decreed
He dies to-night.
Now the good gods forbid
That our renowned Rome, whose gratitude
Towards her deserved children is enrolld
In Joves own book, like an unnatural dam
Should now eat up her own!
Hes a disease that must be cut away.
O, hes a limb that has but a disease;
Mortal, to cut it off; to cure it, easy.
What has he done to Rome thats worthy death?
Killing our enemies, the blood he hath lost--
Which, I dare vouch, is more than that he hath,
By many an ounce--he droppd it for his country;
And what is left, to lose it by his country,
Were to us all, that dot and suffer it,
A brand to the end o the world.
This is clean kam.
Merely awry: when he did love his country,
It honourd him.
The service of the foot
Being once gangrened, is not then respected
For what before it was.
Well hear no more.
Pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence:
Lest his infection, being of catching nature,
Spread further.
One word more, one word.
This tiger-footed rage, when it shall find
The harm of unscannd swiftness, will too late
Tie leaden pounds tos heels. Proceed by process;
Lest parties, as he is beloved, break out,
And sack great Rome with Romans.
If it were so,--
What do ye talk?
Have we not had a taste of his obedience?
Our aediles smote? ourselves resisted? Come.
Consider this: he has been bred i the wars
Since he could draw a sword, and is ill schoold
In bolted language; meal and bran together
He throws without distinction. Give me leave,
Ill go to him, and undertake to bring him
Where he shall answer, by a lawful form,
In peace, to his utmost peril.
Noble tribunes,
It is the humane way: the other course
Will prove too bloody, and the end of it
Unknown to the beginning.
Noble Menenius,
Be you then as the peoples officer.
Masters, lay down your weapons.
Go not home.
Meet on the market-place. Well attend you there:
Where, if you bring not Marcius, well proceed
In our first way.
Ill bring him to you.
To the Senators
Let me desire your company: he must come,
Or what is worst will follow.
Pray you, lets to him.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A room in CORIOLANUSS house.
Enter CORIOLANUS with Patricians
Let them puff all about mine ears, present me
Death on the wheel or at wild horses heels,
Or pile ten hills on the Tarpeian rock,
That the precipitation might down stretch
Below the beam of sight, yet will I still
Be thus to them.
You do the nobler.
I muse my mother
Does not approve me further, who was wont
To call them woollen vassals, things created
To buy and sell with groats, to show bare heads
In congregations, to yawn, be still and wonder,
When one but of my ordinance stood up
To speak of peace or war.
Enter VOLUMNIA
I talk of you:
Why did you wish me milder? would you have me
False to my nature? Rather say I play
The man I am.
O, sir, sir, sir,
I would have had you put your power well on,
Before you had worn it out.
Let go.
You might have been enough the man you are,
With striving less to be so; lesser had been
The thwartings of your dispositions, if
You had not showd them how ye were disposed
Ere they lackd power to cross you.
Let them hang.
Ay, and burn too.
Enter MENENIUS and Senators
Come, come, you have been too rough, something
too rough;
You must return and mend it.
Theres no remedy;
Unless, by not so doing, our good city
Cleave in the midst, and perish.
Pray, be counselld:
I have a heart as little apt as yours,
But yet a brain that leads my use of anger
To better vantage.
Well said, noble woman?
Before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that
The violent fit o the time craves it as physic
For the whole state, I would put mine armour on,
Which I can scarcely bear.
What must I do?
Return to the tribunes.
Well, what then? what then?
Repent what you have spoke.
For them! I cannot do it to the gods;
Must I then dot to them?
You are too absolute;
Though therein you can never be too noble,
But when extremities speak. I have heard you say,
Honour and policy, like unseverd friends,
I the war do grow together: grant that, and tell me,
In peace what each of them by the other lose,
That they combine not there.
Tush, tush!
A good demand.
If it be honour in your wars to seem
The same you are not, which, for your best ends,
You adopt your policy, how is it less or worse,
That it shall hold companionship in peace
With honour, as in war, since that to both
It stands in like request?
Why force you this?
Because that now it lies you on to speak
To the people; not by your own instruction,
Nor by the matter which your heart prompts you,
But with such words that are but rooted in
Your tongue, though but bastards and syllables
Of no allowance to your bosoms truth.
Now, this no more dishonours you at all
Than to take in a town with gentle words,
Which else would put you to your fortune and
The hazard of much blood.
I would dissemble with my nature where
My fortunes and my friends at stake required
I should do so in honour: I am in this,
Your wife, your son, these senators, the nobles;
And you will rather show our general louts
How you can frown than spend a fawn upon em,
For the inheritance of their loves and safeguard
Of what that want might ruin.
Noble lady!
Come, go with us; speak fair: you may salve so,
Not what is dangerous present, but the loss
Of what is past.
I prithee now, my son,
Go to them, with this bonnet in thy hand;
And thus far having stretchd it--here be with them--
Thy knee bussing the stones--for in such business
Action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant
More learned than the ears--waving thy head,
Which often, thus, correcting thy stout heart,
Now humble as the ripest mulberry
That will not hold the handling: or say to them,
Thou art their soldier, and being bred in broils
Hast not the soft way which, thou dost confess,
Were fit for thee to use as they to claim,
In asking their good loves, but thou wilt frame
Thyself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far
As thou hast power and person.
This but done,
Even as she speaks, why, their hearts were yours;
For they have pardons, being askd, as free
As words to little purpose.
Prithee now,
Go, and be ruled: although I know thou hadst rather
Follow thine enemy in a fiery gulf
Than flatter him in a bower. Here is Cominius.
Enter COMINIUS
I have been i the market-place; and, sir,tis fit
You make strong party, or defend yourself
By calmness or by absence: alls in anger.
Only fair speech.
I think twill serve, if he
Can thereto frame his spirit.
He must, and will
Prithee now, say you will, and go about it.
Must I go show them my unbarbed sconce?
Must I with base tongue give my noble heart
A lie that it must bear? Well, I will dot:
Yet, were there but this single plot to lose,
This mould of Marcius, they to dust should grind it
And throwt against the wind. To the market-place!
You have put me now to such a part which never
I shall discharge to the life.
Come, come, well prompt you.
I prithee now, sweet son, as thou hast said
My praises made thee first a soldier, so,
To have my praise for this, perform a part
Thou hast not done before.
Well, I must dot:
Away, my disposition, and possess me
Some harlots spirit! my throat of war be turnd,
Which quired with my drum, into a pipe
Small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice
That babies lulls asleep! the smiles of knaves
Tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys tears take up
The glasses of my sight! a beggars tongue
Make motion through my lips, and my armd knees,
Who bowd but in my stirrup, bend like his
That hath received an alms! I will not dot,
Lest I surcease to honour mine own truth
And by my bodys action teach my mind
A most inherent baseness.
At thy choice, then:
To beg of thee, it is my more dishonour
Than thou of them. Come all to ruin; let
Thy mother rather feel thy pride than fear
Thy dangerous stoutness, for I mock at death
With as big heart as thou. Do as thou list
Thy valiantness was mine, thou suckdst it from me,
But owe thy pride thyself.
Pray, be content:
Mother, I am going to the market-place;
Chide me no more. Ill mountebank their loves,
Cog their hearts from them, and come home beloved
Of all the trades in Rome. Look, I am going:
Commend me to my wife. Ill return consul;
Or never trust to what my tongue can do
I the way of flattery further.
Do your will.
Exit
Away! the tribunes do attend you: arm yourself
To answer mildly; for they are prepared
With accusations, as I hear, more strong
Than are upon you yet.
The word is mildly. Pray you, let us go:
Let them accuse me by invention, I
Will answer in mine honour.
Ay, but mildly.
Well, mildly be it then. Mildly!
Exeunt
SCENE III. The same. The Forum.
Enter SICINIUS and BRUTUS
In this point charge him home, that he affects
Tyrannical power: if he evade us there,
Enforce him with his envy to the people,
And that the spoil got on the Antiates
Was neer distributed.
Enter an AEdile
What, will he come?
Hes coming.
How accompanied?
With old Menenius, and those senators
That always favourd him.
Have you a catalogue
Of all the voices that we have procured
Set down by the poll?
I have; tis ready.
Have you collected them by tribes?
I have.
Assemble presently the people hither;
And when they bear me say It shall be so
I the right and strength o the commons, be it either
For death, for fine, or banishment, then let them
If I say fine, cry Fine; if death, cry Death.
Insisting on the old prerogative
And power i the truth o the cause.
I shall inform them.
And when such time they have begun to cry,
Let them not cease, but with a din confused
Enforce the present execution
Of what we chance to sentence.
Very well.
Make them be strong and ready for this hint,
When we shall hap to give t them.
Go about it.
Exit AEdile
Put him to choler straight: he hath been used
Ever to conquer, and to have his worth
Of contradiction: being once chafed, he cannot
Be reind again to temperance; then he speaks
Whats in his heart; and that is there which looks
With us to break his neck.
Well, here he comes.
Enter CORIOLANUS, MENENIUS, and COMINIUS, with Senators and Patricians
Calmly, I do beseech you.
Ay, as an ostler, that for the poorest piece
Will bear the knave by the volume. The honourd gods
Keep Rome in safety, and the chairs of justice
Supplied with worthy men! plant love among s!
Throng our large temples with the shows of peace,
And not our streets with war!
Amen, amen.
A noble wish.
Re-enter AEdile, with Citizens
Draw near, ye people.
List to your tribunes. Audience: peace, I say!
First, hear me speak.
Well, say. Peace, ho!
Shall I be charged no further than this present?
Must all determine here?
I do demand,
If you submit you to the peoples voices,
Allow their officers and are content
To suffer lawful censure for such faults
As shall be proved upon you?
I am content.
Lo, citizens, he says he is content:
The warlike service he has done, consider; think
Upon the wounds his body bears, which show
Like graves i the holy churchyard.
Scratches with briers,
Scars to move laughter only.
Consider further,
That when he speaks not like a citizen,
You find him like a soldier: do not take
His rougher accents for malicious sounds,
But, as I say, such as become a soldier,
Rather than envy you.
Well, well, no more.
What is the matter
That being passd for consul with full voice,
I am so dishonourd that the very hour
You take it off again?
Answer to us.
Say, then: tis true, I ought so.
We charge you, that you have contrived to take
From Rome all seasond office and to wind
Yourself into a power tyrannical;
For which you are a traitor to the people.
How! traitor!
Nay, temperately; your promise.
The fires i the lowest hell fold-in the people!
Call me their traitor! Thou injurious tribune!
Within thine eyes sat twenty thousand deaths,
In thy hand clutchd as many millions, in
Thy lying tongue both numbers, I would say
Thou liest unto thee with a voice as free
As I do pray the gods.
Mark you this, people?
To the rock, to the rock with him!
Peace!
We need not put new matter to his charge:
What you have seen him do and heard him speak,
Beating your officers, cursing yourselves,
Opposing laws with strokes and here defying
Those whose great power must try him; even this,
So criminal and in such capital kind,
Deserves the extremest death.
But since he hath
Served well for Rome,--
What do you prate of service?
I talk of that, that know it.
You?
Is this the promise that you made your mother?
Know, I pray you,--
I know no further:
Let them pronounce the steep Tarpeian death,
Vagabond exile, raying, pent to linger
But with a grain a day, I would not buy
Their mercy at the price of one fair word;
Nor cheque my courage for what they can give,
To havet with saying Good morrow.
For that he has,
As much as in him lies, from time to time
Envied against the people, seeking means
To pluck away their power, as now at last
Given hostile strokes, and that not in the presence
Of dreaded justice, but on the ministers
That do distribute it; in the name o the people
And in the power of us the tribunes, we,
Even from this instant, banish him our city,
In peril of precipitation
From off the rock Tarpeian never more
To enter our Rome gates: i the peoples name,
I say it shall be so.
It shall be so, it shall be so; let him away:
Hes banishd, and it shall be so.
Hear me, my masters, and my common friends,--
Hes sentenced; no more hearing.
Let me speak:
I have been consul, and can show for Rome
Her enemies marks upon me. I do love
My countrys good with a respect more tender,
More holy and profound, than mine own life,
My dear wifes estimate, her wombs increase,
And treasure of my loins; then if I would
Speak that,--
We know your drift: speak what?
Theres no more to be said, but he is banishd,
As enemy to the people and his country:
It shall be so.
It shall be so, it shall be so.
You common cry of curs! whose breath I hate
As reek o the rotten fens, whose loves I prize
As the dead carcasses of unburied men
That do corrupt my air, I banish you;
And here remain with your uncertainty!
Let every feeble rumour shake your hearts!
Your enemies, with nodding of their plumes,
Fan you into despair! Have the power still
To banish your defenders; till at length
Your ignorance, which finds not till it feels,
Making not reservation of yourselves,
Still your own foes, deliver you as most
Abated captives to some nation
That won you without blows! Despising,
For you, the city, thus I turn my back:
There is a world elsewhere.
Exeunt CORIOLANUS, COMINIUS, MENENIUS, Senators, and Patricians
The peoples enemy is gone, is gone!
Our enemy is banishd! he is gone! Hoo! hoo!
Shouting, and throwing up their caps
Go, see him out at gates, and follow him,
As he hath followed you, with all despite;
Give him deserved vexation. Let a guard
Attend us through the city.
Come, come; lets see him out at gates; come.
The gods preserve our noble tribunes! Come.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Rome. Before a gate of the city.
Enter CORIOLANUS, VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, MENENIUS, COMINIUS, with the young Nobility of Rome
Come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast
With many heads butts me away. Nay, mother,
Where is your ancient courage? you were used
To say extremity was the trier of spirits;
That common chances common men could bear;
That when the sea was calm all boats alike
Showd mastership in floating; fortunes blows,
When most struck home, being gentle wounded, craves
A noble cunning: you were used to load me
With precepts that would make invincible
The heart that connd them.
O heavens! O heavens!
Nay! prithee, woman,--
Now the red pestilence strike all trades in Rome,
