And occupations perish!
What, what, what!
I shall be loved when I am lackd. Nay, mother.
Resume that spirit, when you were wont to say,
If you had been the wife of Hercules,
Six of his labours yould have done, and saved
Your husband so much sweat. Cominius,
Droop not; adieu. Farewell, my wife, my mother:
Ill do well yet. Thou old and true Menenius,
Thy tears are salter than a younger mans,
And venomous to thine eyes. My sometime general,
I have seen thee stem, and thou hast oft beheld
Heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women
Tis fond to wail inevitable strokes,
As tis to laugh at em. My mother, you wot well
My hazards still have been your solace: and
Believet not lightly--though I go alone,
Like to a lonely dragon, that his fen
Makes feard and talkd of more than seen--your son
Will or exceed the common or be caught
With cautelous baits and practise.
My first son.
Whither wilt thou go? Take good Cominius
With thee awhile: determine on some course,
More than a wild exposture to each chance
That starts i the way before thee.
O the gods!
Ill follow thee a month, devise with thee
Where thou shalt rest, that thou mayst hear of us
And we of thee: so if the time thrust forth
A cause for thy repeal, we shall not send
Oer the vast world to seek a single man,
And lose advantage, which doth ever cool
I the absence of the needer.
Fare ye well:
Thou hast years upon thee; and thou art too full
Of the wars surfeits, to go rove with one
Thats yet unbruised: bring me but out at gate.
Come, my sweet wife, my dearest mother, and
My friends of noble touch, when I am forth,
Bid me farewell, and smile. I pray you, come.
While I remain above the ground, you shall
Hear from me still, and never of me aught
But what is like me formerly.
Thats worthily
As any ear can hear. Come, lets not weep.
If I could shake off but one seven years
From these old arms and legs, by the good gods,
Ild with thee every foot.
Give me thy hand: Come.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. A  street near the gate.
Enter SICINIUS, BRUTUS, and an AEdile
Bid them all home; hes gone, and well no further.
The nobility are vexd, whom we see have sided
In his behalf.
Now we have shown our power,
Let us seem humbler after it is done
Than when it was a-doing.
Bid them home:
Say their great enemy is gone, and they
Stand in their ancient strength.
Dismiss them home.
Exit AEdile
Here comes his mother.
Lets not meet her.
Why?
They say shes mad.
They have taen note of us: keep on your way.
Enter VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA, and MENENIUS
O, yere well met: the hoarded plague o the gods
Requite your love!
Peace, peace; be not so loud.
If that I could for weeping, you should hear,--
Nay, and you shall hear some.
To BRUTUS
Will you be gone?
[To SICINIUS]  You shall stay too: I would I had the power
To say so to my husband.
Are  you mankind?
Ay, fool; is that a shame? Note but this fool.
Was not a man my father? Hadst thou foxship
To banish him that struck more blows for Rome
Than thou hast spoken words?
O blessed heavens!
More noble blows than ever thou wise words;
And for Romes good. Ill tell thee what; yet go:
Nay, but thou shalt stay too: I would my son
Were in Arabia, and thy tribe before him,
His good sword in his hand.
What then?
What then!
Held make an end of thy posterity.
Bastards and all.
Good man, the wounds that he does bear for Rome!
Come, come, peace.
I would he had continued to his country
As he began, and not unknit himself
The noble knot he made.
I would he had.
I would he had! Twas you incensed the rabble:
Cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth
As I can of those mysteries which heaven
Will not have earth to know.
Pray, let us go.
Now, pray, sir, get you gone:
You have done a brave deed. Ere you go, hear this:--
As far as doth the Capitol exceed
The meanest house in Rome, so far my son--
This ladys husband here, this, do you see--
Whom you have banishd, does exceed you all.
Well, well, well leave you.
Why stay we to be baited
With one that wants her wits?
Take my prayers with you.
Exeunt Tribunes
I would the gods had nothing else to do
But to confirm my curses! Could I meet em
But once a-day, it would unclog my heart
Of what lies heavy tot.
You have told them home;
And, by my troth, you have cause. Youll sup with me?
Angers my meat; I sup upon myself,
And so shall starve with feeding. Come, lets go:
Leave this faint puling and lament as I do,
In anger, Juno-like. Come, come, come.
Fie, fie, fie!
Exeunt
SCENE III. A highway between Rome and Antium.
Enter a Roman and a Volsce, meeting
I know you well, sir, and you know
me: your name, I think, is Adrian.
It is so, sir: truly, I have forgot you.
I am a Roman; and my services are,
as you are, against em: know you me yet?
Nicanor? no.
The same, sir.
You had more beard when I last saw you; but your
favour is well approved by your tongue. Whats the
news in Rome? I have a note from the Volscian state,
to find you out there: you have well saved me a
days journey.
There hath been in Rome strange insurrections; the
people against the senators, patricians, and nobles.
Hath been! is it ended, then? Our state thinks not
so: they are in a most warlike preparation, and
hope to come upon them in the heat of their division.
The main blaze of it is past, but a small thing
would make it flame again: for the nobles receive
so to heart the banishment of that worthy
Coriolanus, that they are in a ripe aptness to take
all power from the people and to pluck from them
their tribunes for ever. This lies glowing, I can
tell you, and is almost mature for the violent
breaking out.
Coriolanus banished!
Banished, sir.
You will be welcome with this intelligence, Nicanor.
The day serves well for them now. I have heard it
said, the fittest time to corrupt a mans wife is
when shes fallen out with her husband. Your noble
Tullus Aufidius will appear well in these wars, his
great opposer, Coriolanus, being now in no request
of his country.
He cannot choose. I am most fortunate, thus
accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my
business, and I will merrily accompany you home.
I shall, between this and supper, tell you most
strange things from Rome; all tending to the good of
their adversaries. Have you an army ready, say you?
A most royal one; the centurions and their charges,
distinctly billeted, already in the entertainment,
and to be on foot at an hours warning.
I am joyful to hear of their readiness, and am the
man, I think, that shall set them in present action.
So, sir, heartily well met, and most glad of your company.
You take my part from me, sir; I have the most cause
to be glad of yours.
Well, let us go together.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Antium. Before Aufidiuss house.
Enter CORIOLANUS in mean apparel, disguised and muffled
A goodly city is this Antium. City,
Tis I that made thy widows: many an heir
Of these fair edifices fore my wars
Have I heard groan and drop: then know me not,
Lest that thy wives with spits and boys with stones
In puny battle slay me.
Enter a Citizen
Save you, sir.
And you.
Direct me, if it be your will,
Where great Aufidius lies: is he in Antium?
He is, and feasts the nobles of the state
At his house this night.
Which is his house, beseech you?
This, here before you.
Thank you, sir: farewell.
Exit Citizen
O world, thy slippery turns! Friends now fast sworn,
Whose double bosoms seem to wear one heart,
Whose house, whose bed, whose meal, and exercise,
Are still together, who twin, as twere, in love
Unseparable, shall within this hour,
On a dissension of a doit, break out
To bitterest enmity: so, fellest foes,
Whose passions and whose plots have broke their sleep,
To take the one the other, by some chance,
Some trick not worth an egg, shall grow dear friends
And interjoin their issues. So with me:
My birth-place hate I, and my loves upon
This enemy town. Ill enter: if he slay me,
He does fair justice; if he give me way,
Ill do his country service.
Exit
SCENE V. The same. A hall in Aufidiuss house.
Music within. Enter a Servingman
Wine, wine, wine! What service
is here! I think our fellows are asleep.
Exit
Enter a second Servingman
Wheres Cotus? my master calls
for him. Cotus!
Exit
Enter CORIOLANUS
A goodly house: the feast smells well; but I
Appear not like a guest.
Re-enter the first Servingman
What would you have, friend? whence are you?
Heres no place for you: pray, go to the door.
Exit
I have deserved no better entertainment,
In being Coriolanus.
Re-enter second Servingman
Whence are you, sir? Has the porter his eyes in his
head; that he gives entrance to such companions?
Pray, get you out.
Away!
Away! get you away.
Now thourt troublesome.
Are you so brave? Ill have you talked with anon.
Enter a third Servingman. The first meets him
What fellows this?
A strange one as ever I looked on: I cannot get him
out of the house: prithee, call my master to him.
Retires
What have you to do here, fellow? Pray you, avoid
the house.
Let me but stand; I will not hurt your hearth.
What are you?
A gentleman.
A marvellous poor one.
True, so I am.
Pray you, poor gentleman, take up some other
station; heres no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.
Follow your function, go, and batten on cold bits.
Pushes him away
What, you will not? Prithee, tell my master what a
strange guest he has here.
And I shall.
Exit
Where dwellest thou?
Under the canopy.
Under the canopy!
Ay.
Wheres that?
I the city of kites and crows.
I the city of kites and crows! What an ass it is!
Then thou dwellest with daws too?
No, I serve not thy master.
How, sir! do you meddle with my master?
Ay; tis an honester service than to meddle with thy
mistress. Thou pratest, and pratest; serve with thy
trencher, hence!
Beats him away. Exit third Servingman
Enter AUFIDIUS with the second Servingman
Where is this fellow?
Here, sir: Ild have beaten him like a dog, but for
disturbing the lords within.
Retires
Whence comest thou? what wouldst thou? thy name?
Why speakst not? speak, man: whats thy name?
If, Tullus,
Unmuffling
Not yet thou knowest me, and, seeing me, dost not
Think me for the man I am, necessity
Commands me name myself.
What is thy name?
A name unmusical to the Volscians ears,
And harsh in sound to thine.
Say, whats thy name?
Thou hast a grim appearance, and thy face
Bears a command int; though thy tackles torn.
Thou showst a noble vessel: whats thy name?
Prepare thy brow to frown: knowst
thou me yet?
I know thee not: thy name?
My name is Caius Marcius, who hath done
To thee particularly and to all the Volsces
Great hurt and mischief; thereto witness may
My surname, Coriolanus: the painful service,
The extreme dangers and the drops of blood
Shed for my thankless country are requited
But with that surname; a good memory,
And witness of the malice and displeasure
Which thou shouldst bear me: only that name remains;
The cruelty and envy of the people,
Permitted by our dastard nobles, who
Have all forsook me, hath devourd the rest;
And sufferd me by the voice of slaves to be
Whoopd out of Rome. Now this extremity
Hath brought me to thy hearth; not out of hope--
Mistake me not--to save my life, for if
I had feard death, of all the men i the world
I would have voided thee, but in mere spite,
To be full quit of those my banishers,
Stand I before thee here. Then if thou hast
A heart of wreak in thee, that wilt revenge
Thine own particular wrongs and stop those maims
Of shame seen through thy country, speed
thee straight,
And make my misery serve thy turn: so use it
That my revengeful services may prove
As benefits to thee, for I will fight
Against my cankerd country with the spleen
Of all the under fiends. But if so be
Thou darest not this and that to prove more fortunes
Thourt tired, then, in a word, I also am
Longer to live most weary, and present
My throat to thee and to thy ancient malice;
Which not to cut would show thee but a fool,
Since I have ever followd thee with hate,
Drawn tuns of blood out of thy countrys breast,
And cannot live but to thy shame, unless
It be to do thee service.
O Marcius, Marcius!
Each word thou hast spoke hath weeded from my heart
A root of ancient envy. If Jupiter
Should from yond cloud speak divine things,
And say Tis true, Ild not believe them more
Than thee, all noble Marcius. Let me twine
Mine arms about that body, where against
My grained ash an hundred times hath broke
And scarrd the moon with splinters: here I clip
The anvil of my sword, and do contest
As hotly and as nobly with thy love
As ever in ambitious strength I did
Contend against thy valour. Know thou first,
I loved the maid I married; never man
Sighd truer breath; but that I see thee here,
Thou noble thing! more dances my rapt heart
Than when I first my wedded mistress saw
Bestride my threshold. Why, thou Mars! I tell thee,
We have a power on foot; and I had purpose
Once more to hew thy target from thy brawn,
Or lose mine arm fort: thou hast beat me out
Twelve several times, and I have nightly since
Dreamt of encounters twixt thyself and me;
We have been down together in my sleep,
Unbuckling helms, fisting each others throat,
And waked half dead with nothing. Worthy Marcius,
Had we no quarrel else to Rome, but that
Thou art thence banishd, we would muster all
From twelve to seventy, and pouring war
Into the bowels of ungrateful Rome,
Like a bold flood oer-bear. O, come, go in,
And take our friendly senators by the hands;
Who now are here, taking their leaves of me,
Who am prepared against your territories,
Though not for Rome itself.
You bless me, gods!
Therefore, most absolute sir, if thou wilt have
The leading of thine own revenges, take
The one half of my commission; and set down--
As best thou art experienced, since thou knowst
Thy countrys strength and weakness,--thine own ways;
Whether to knock against the gates of Rome,
Or rudely visit them in parts remote,
To fright them, ere destroy. But come in:
Let me commend thee first to those that shall
Say yea to thy desires. A thousand welcomes!
And more a friend than eer an enemy;
Yet, Marcius, that was much. Your hand: most welcome!
Exeunt CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS. The two Servingmen come forward
Heres a strange alteration!
By my hand, I had thought to have strucken him with
a cudgel; and yet my mind gave me his clothes made a
false report of him.
What an arm he has! he turned me about with his
finger and his thumb, as one would set up a top.
Nay, I knew by his face that there was something in
him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,--I
cannot tell how to term it.
He had so; looking as it were--would I were hanged,
but I thought there was more in him than I could think.
So did I, Ill be sworn: he is simply the rarest
man i the world.
I think he is: but a greater soldier than he you wot on.
Who, my master?
Nay, its no matter for that.
Worth six on him.
Nay, not so neither: but I take him to be the
greater soldier.
Faith, look you, one cannot tell how to say that:
for the defence of a town, our general is excellent.
Ay, and for an assault too.
Re-enter third Servingman
O slaves, I can tell you news,-- news, you rascals!
What, what, what? lets partake.
I would not be a Roman, of all nations; I had as
lieve be a condemned man.
Wherefore? wherefore?
Why, heres he that was wont to thwack our general,
Caius Marcius.
Why do you say thwack our general ?
I do not say thwack our general; but he was always
good enough for him.
Come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too
hard for him; I have heard him say so himself.
He was too hard for him directly, to say the troth
ont: before Corioli he scotched him and notched
him like a carbon ado.
An he had been cannibally given, he might have
broiled and eaten him too.
But, more of thy news?
Why, he is so made on here within, as if he were son
and heir to Mars; set at upper end o the table; no
question asked him by any of the senators, but they
stand bald before him: our general himself makes a
mistress of him: sanctifies himself withs hand and
turns up the white o the eye to his discourse. But
the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i
the middle and but one half of what he was
yesterday; for the other has half, by the entreaty
and grant of the whole table. Hell go, he says,
and sowl the porter of Rome gates by the ears: he
will mow all down before him, and leave his passage polled.
And hes as like to dot as any man I can imagine.
Dot! he will dot; for, look you, sir, he has as
many friends as enemies; which friends, sir, as it
were, durst not, look you, sir, show themselves, as
we term it, his friends whilst hes in directitude.
Directitude! whats that?
But when they shall see, sir, his crest up again,
and the man in blood, they will out of their
burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with
him.
But when goes this forward?
To-morrow; to-day; presently; you shall have the
drum struck up this afternoon: tis, as it were, a
parcel of their feast, and to be executed ere they
wipe their lips.
Why, then we shall have a stirring world again.
This peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase
tailors, and breed ballad-makers.
Let me have war, say I; it exceeds peace as far as
day does night; its spritely, waking, audible, and
full of vent. Peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy;
mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter of more
bastard children than wars a destroyer of men.
Tis so: and as war, in some sort, may be said to
be a ravisher, so it cannot be denied but peace is a
great maker of cuckolds.
Ay, and it makes men hate one another.
Reason; because they then less need one another.
The wars for my money. I hope to see Romans as cheap
as Volscians. They are rising, they are rising.
In, in, in, in!
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Rome. A public place.
Enter SICINIUS and BRUTUS
We hear not of him, neither need we fear him;
His remedies are tame i the present peace
And quietness of the people, which before
Were in wild hurry. Here do we make his friends
Blush that the world goes well, who rather had,
Though they themselves did suffer byt, behold
Dissentious numbers pestering streets than see
Our tradesmen with in their shops and going
About their functions friendly.
We stood tot in good time.
Enter MENENIUS
Is this Menenius?
Tis he,tis he: O, he is grown most kind of late.
Hail sir!
Hail to you both!
Your Coriolanus
Is not much missd, but with his friends:
The commonwealth doth stand, and so would do,
Were he more angry at it.
Alls well; and might have been much better, if
He could have temporized.
Where is he, hear you?
Nay, I hear nothing: his mother and his wife
Hear nothing from him.
Enter three or four Citizens
The gods preserve you both!
God-den, our neighbours.
God-den to you all, god-den to you all.
Ourselves, our wives, and children, on our knees,
Are bound to pray for you both.
Live, and thrive!
Farewell, kind neighbours: we wishd Coriolanus
Had loved you as we did.
Now the gods keep you!
Farewell, farewell.
Exeunt Citizens
This is a happier and more comely time
Than when these fellows ran about the streets,
Crying confusion.
Caius Marcius was
A worthy officer i the war; but insolent,
Oercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking,
Self-loving,--
And affecting one sole throne,
Without assistance.
I think not so.
We should by this, to all our lamentation,
If he had gone forth consul, found it so.
The gods have well prevented it, and Rome
Sits safe and still without him.
Enter an AEdile
Worthy tribunes,
There is a slave, whom we have put in prison,
Reports, the Volsces with two several powers
Are enterd in the Roman territories,
And with the deepest malice of the war
Destroy what lies before em.
Tis Aufidius,
Who, hearing of our Marcius banishment,
Thrusts forth his horns again into the world;
Which were inshelld when Marcius stood for Rome,
And durst not once peep out.
Come, what talk you
Of Marcius?
Go see this rumourer whippd. It cannot be
The Volsces dare break with us.
Cannot be!
We have record that very well it can,
And three examples of the like have been
Within my age. But reason with the fellow,
Before you punish him, where he heard this,
Lest you shall chance to whip your information
And beat the messenger who bids beware
Of what is to be dreaded.
Tell not me:
I know this cannot be.
Not possible.
Enter a Messenger
The nobles in great earnestness are going
All to the senate-house: some news is come
That turns their countenances.
Tis this slave;--
Go whip him, fore the peoples eyes:--his raising;
Nothing but his report.
Yes, worthy sir,
The slaves report is seconded; and more,
More fearful, is deliverd.
What more fearful?
It is spoke freely out of many mouths--
How probable I do not know--that Marcius,
Joind with Aufidius, leads a power gainst Rome,
And vows revenge as spacious as between
The youngst and oldest thing.
This is most likely!
Raised only, that the weaker sort may wish
Good Marcius home again.
The very trick ont.
This is unlikely:
He and Aufidius can no more atone
Than violentest contrariety.
Enter a second Messenger
You are sent for to the senate:
A fearful army, led by Caius Marcius
Associated with Aufidius, rages
Upon our territories; and have already
Oerborne their way, consumed with fire, and took
What lay before them.
Enter COMINIUS
O, you have made good work!
What news? what news?
You have holp to ravish your own daughters and
To melt the city leads upon your pates,
To see your wives dishonourd to your noses,--
Whats the news? whats the news?
Your temples burned in their cement, and
Your franchises, whereon you stood, confined
Into an augers bore.
Pray now, your news?
You have made fair work, I fear me.--Pray, your news?--
If Marcius should be joind with Volscians,--
If!
He is their god: he leads them like a thing
Made by some other deity than nature,
That shapes man better; and they follow him,
Against us brats, with no less confidence
Than boys pursuing summer butterflies,
Or butchers killing flies.
You have made good work,
You and your apron-men; you that stood so up much
on the voice of occupation and
The breath of garlic-eaters!
He will shake
Your Rome about your ears.
As Hercules
Did shake down mellow fruit.
You have made fair work!
But is this true, sir?
Ay; and youll look pale
Before you find it other. All the regions
Do smilingly revolt; and who resist
Are mockd for valiant ignorance,
And perish constant fools. Who ist can blame him?
Your enemies and his find something in him.
We are all undone, unless
The noble man have mercy.
Who shall ask it?
The tribunes cannot dot for shame; the people
Deserve such pity of him as the wolf
Does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they
Should say Be good to Rome, they charged him even
As those should do that had deserved his hate,
And therein showd like enemies.
Tis true:
If he were putting to my house the brand
That should consume it, I have not the face
To say Beseech you, cease. You have made fair hands,
You and your crafts! you have crafted fair!
You have brought
A trembling upon Rome, such as was never
So incapable of help.
Say not we brought it.
How! Was it we? we loved him but, like beasts
And cowardly nobles, gave way unto your clusters,
Who did hoot him out o the city.
But I fear
Theyll roar him in again. Tullus Aufidius,
The second name of men, obeys his points
As if he were his officer: desperation
Is all the policy, strength and defence,
That Rome can make against them.
Enter a troop of Citizens
Here come the clusters.
And is Aufidius with him? You are they
That made the air unwholesome, when you cast
Your stinking greasy caps in hooting at
Coriolanus exile. Now hes coming;
And not a hair upon a soldiers head
Which will not prove a whip: as many coxcombs
As you threw caps up will he tumble down,
And pay you for your voices. Tis no matter;
if he could burn us all into one coal,
We have deserved it.
Faith, we hear fearful news.
For mine own part,
When I said, banish him, I said twas pity.
And so did I.
And so did I; and, to say the truth, so did very
many of us: that we did, we did for the best; and
though we willingly consented to his banishment, yet
it was against our will.
Ye re goodly things, you voices!
You have made
Good work, you and your cry! Shalls to the Capitol?
O, ay, what else?
Exeunt COMINIUS and MENENIUS
Go, masters, get you home; be not dismayd:
These are a side that would be glad to have
This true which they so seem to fear. Go home,
And show no sign of fear.
The gods be good to us! Come, masters, lets home.
I ever said we were i the wrong when we banished
him.
So did we all. But, come, lets home.
Exeunt Citizens
I do not like this news.
Nor I.
Lets to the Capitol. Would half my wealth
Would buy this for a lie!
Pray, let us go.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. A camp, at a small distance from Rome.
Enter AUFIDIUS and his Lieutenant
Do they still fly to the Roman?
I do not know what witchcrafts in him, but
Your soldiers use him as the grace fore meat,
Their talk at table, and their thanks at end;
And you are darkend in this action, sir,
Even by your own.
I cannot help it now,
Unless, by using means, I lame the foot
Of our design. He bears himself more proudlier,
Even to my person, than I thought he would
When first I did embrace him: yet his nature
In thats no changeling; and I must excuse
What cannot be amended.
Yet I wish, sir,--
I mean for your particular,--you had not
Joind in commission with him; but either
Had borne the action of yourself, or else
To him had left it solely.
I understand thee well; and be thou sure,
when he shall come to his account, he knows not
What I can urge against him. Although it seems,
And so he thinks, and is no less apparent
To the vulgar eye, that he bears all things fairly.
And shows good husbandry for the Volscian state,
Fights dragon-like, and does achieve as soon
As draw his sword; yet he hath left undone
That which shall break his neck or hazard mine,
Wheneer we come to our account.
Sir, I beseech you, think you hell carry Rome?
All places yield to him ere he sits down;
And the nobility of Rome are his:
The senators and patricians love him too:
The tribunes are no soldiers; and their people
Will be as rash in the repeal, as hasty
To expel him thence. I think hell be to Rome
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it
By sovereignty of nature. First he was
A noble servant to them; but he could not
Carry his honours even: whether twas pride,
Which out of daily fortune ever taints
The happy man; whether defect of judgment,
To fail in the disposing of those chances
Which he was lord of; or whether nature,
Not to be other than one thing, not moving
From the casque to the cushion, but commanding peace
Even with the same austerity and garb
As he controlld the war; but one of these--
As he hath spices of them all, not all,
For I dare so far free him--made him feard,
So hated, and so banishd: but he has a merit,
To choke it in the utterance. So our virtues
Lie in the interpretation of the time:
And power, unto itself most commendable,
Hath not a tomb so evident as a chair
To extol what it hath done.
One fire drives out one fire; one nail, one nail;
Rights by rights falter, strengths by strengths do fail.
Come, lets away. When, Caius, Rome is thine,
Thou art poorst of all; then shortly art thou mine.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Rome. A public place.
Enter MENENIUS, COMINIUS, SICINIUS, BRUTUS, and others
No, Ill not go: you hear what he hath said
Which was sometime his general; who loved him
In a most dear particular. He calld me father:
But what o that? Go, you that banishd him;
A mile before his tent fall down, and knee
The way into his mercy: nay, if he coyd
To hear Cominius speak, Ill keep at home.
He would not seem to know me.
Do you hear?
Yet one time he did call me by my name:
I urged our old acquaintance, and the drops
That we have bled together. Coriolanus
He would not answer to: forbad all names;
He was a kind of nothing, titleless,
Till he had forged himself a name o the fire
Of burning Rome.
Why, so: you have made good work!
A pair of tribunes that have rackd for Rome,
To make coals cheap,--a noble memory!
I minded him how royal twas to pardon
When it was less expected: he replied,
It was a bare petition of a state
To one whom they had punishd.
Very well:
Could he say less?
I offerd to awaken his regard
Fors private friends: his answer to me was,
He could not stay to pick them in a pile
Of noisome musty chaff: he said twas folly,
For one poor grain or two, to leave unburnt,
And still to nose the offence.
For one poor grain or two!
I am one of those; his mother, wife, his child,
And this brave fellow too, we are the grains:
You are the musty chaff; and you are smelt
Above the moon: we must be burnt for you.
Nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid
In this so never-needed help, yet do not
Upbraids with our distress. But, sure, if you
Would be your countrys pleader, your good tongue,
More than the instant army we can make,
Might stop our countryman.
No, Ill not meddle.
Pray you, go to him.
What should I do?
Only make trial what your love can do
For Rome, towards Marcius.
Well, and say that Marcius
Return me, as Cominius is returnd,
Unheard; what then?
But as a discontented friend, grief-shot
With his unkindness? sayt be so?
Yet your good will
must have that thanks from Rome, after the measure
As you intended well.
Ill undertake t:
I think hell hear me. Yet, to bite his lip
And hum at good Cominius, much unhearts me.
He was not taken well; he had not dined:
The veins unfilld, our blood is cold, and then
We pout upon the morning, are unapt
To give or to forgive; but when we have stuffd
These and these conveyances of our blood
With wine and feeding, we have suppler souls
Than in our priest-like fasts: therefore Ill watch him
Till he be dieted to my request,
And then Ill set upon him.
You know the very road into his kindness,
And cannot lose your way.
Good faith, Ill prove him,
Speed how it will. I shall ere long have knowledge
Of my success.
Exit
Hell never hear him.
Not?
I tell you, he does sit in gold, his eye
Red as twould burn Rome; and his injury
The gaoler to his pity. I kneeld before him;
Twas very faintly he said Rise; dismissd me
Thus, with his speechless hand: what he would do,
He sent in writing after me; what he would not,
Bound with an oath to yield to his conditions:
So that all hope is vain.
Unless his noble mother, and his wife;
Who, as I hear, mean to solicit him
For mercy to his country. Therefore, lets hence,
And with our fair entreaties haste them on.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Entrance of the Volscian camp before Rome.
Two Sentinels on guard.
Enter to them, MENENIUS
Stay: whence are you?
Stand, and go back.
You guard like men; tis well: but, by your leave,
I am an officer of state, and come
To speak with Coriolanus.
From whence?
From Rome.
You may not pass, you must return: our general
Will no more hear from thence.
Youll see your Rome embraced with fire before
Youll speak with Coriolanus.
Good my friends,
If you have heard your general talk of Rome,
And of his friends there, it is lots to blanks,
My name hath touchd your ears it is Menenius.
Be it so; go back: the virtue of your name
Is not here passable.
I tell thee, fellow,
The general is my lover: I have been
The book of his good acts, whence men have read
His name unparalleld, haply amplified;
For I have ever verified my friends,
Of whom hes chief, with all the size that verity
Would without lapsing suffer: nay, sometimes,
Like to a bowl upon a subtle ground,
I have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise
Have almost stampd the leasing: therefore, fellow,
I must have leave to pass.
Faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his
behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you
should not pass here; no, though it were as virtuous
to lie as to live chastely. Therefore, go back.
Prithee, fellow, remember my name is Menenius,
always factionary on the party of your general.
Howsoever you have been his liar, as you say you
have, I am one that, telling true under him, must
say, you cannot pass. Therefore, go back.
Has he dined, canst thou tell? for I would not
speak with him till after dinner.
You are a Roman, are you?
I am, as thy general is.
Then you should hate Rome, as he does. Can you,
when you have pushed out your gates the very
defender of them, and, in a violent popular
ignorance, given your enemy your shield, think to
front his revenges with the easy groans of old
women, the virginal palms of your daughters, or with
the palsied intercession of such a decayed dotant as
you seem to be? Can you think to blow out the
intended fire your city is ready to flame in, with
such weak breath as this? No, you are deceived;
therefore, back to Rome, and prepare for your
execution: you are condemned, our general has sworn
you out of reprieve and pardon.
Sirrah, if thy captain knew I were here, he would
use me with estimation.
Come, my captain knows you not.
I mean, thy general.
My general cares not for you. Back, I say, go; lest
I let forth your half-pint of blood; back,--thats
the utmost of your having: back.
Nay, but, fellow, fellow,--
Enter CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS
Whats the matter?
Now, you companion, Ill say an errand for you:
You shall know now that I am in estimation; you shall
perceive that a Jack guardant cannot office me from
my son Coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment
with him, if thou standest not i the state of
hanging, or of some death more long in
spectatorship, and crueller in suffering; behold now
presently, and swoon for whats to come upon thee.
To CORIOLANUS
The glorious gods sit in hourly synod about thy
particular prosperity, and love thee no worse than
thy old father Menenius does! O my son, my son!
thou art preparing fire for us; look thee, heres
water to quench it. I was hardly moved to come to
thee; but being assured none but myself could move
thee, I have been blown out of your gates with
sighs; and conjure thee to pardon Rome, and thy
petitionary countrymen. The good gods assuage thy
wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet
here,--this, who, like a block, hath denied my
access to thee.
Away!
How! away!
Wife, mother, child, I know not. My affairs
Are servanted to others: though I owe
My revenge properly, my remission lies
In Volscian breasts. That we have been familiar,
Ingrate forgetfulness shall poison, rather
Than pity note how much. Therefore, be gone.
Mine ears against your suits are stronger than
Your gates against my force. Yet, for I loved thee,
Take this along; I writ it for thy sake
Gives a letter
And would have rent it. Another word, Menenius,
I will not hear thee speak. This man, Aufidius,
Was my beloved in Rome: yet thou beholdst!
You keep a constant temper.
Exeunt CORIOLANUS and AUFIDIUS
Now, sir, is your name Menenius?
Tis a spell, you see, of much  power: you know the
way home again.
Do you hear how we are shent for keeping your
greatness back?
What cause, do you think, I have to swoon?
I neither care for the world nor your general: for
such things as you, I can scarce think theres any,
yere so slight. He that hath a will to die by
himself fears it not from another: let your general
do his worst. For you, be that you are, long; and
your misery increase with your age! I say to you,
as I was said to, Away!
Exit
A noble fellow, I warrant him.
The worthy fellow is our general: hes the rock, the
oak not to be wind-shaken.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The tent of Coriolanus.
Enter CORIOLANUS, AUFIDIUS, and others
We will before the walls of Rome tomorrow
Set down our host. My partner in this action,
You must report to the Volscian lords, how plainly
I have borne this business.
Only their ends
You have respected; stoppd your ears against
The general suit of Rome; never admitted
A private whisper, no, not with such friends
That thought them sure of you.
This last old man,
Whom with a crackd heart I have sent to Rome,
Loved me above the measure of a father;
Nay, godded me, indeed. Their latest refuge
Was to send him; for whose old love I have,
Though I showd sourly to him, once more offerd
The first conditions, which they did refuse
And cannot now accept; to grace him only
That thought he could do more, a very little
I have yielded to: fresh embassies and suits,
Nor from the state nor private friends, hereafter
Will I lend ear to. Ha! what shout is this?
Shout within
Shall I be tempted to infringe my vow
In the same time tis made? I will not.
Enter in mourning habits, VIRGILIA, VOLUMNIA, leading young MARCIUS, VALERIA, and Attendants
My wife comes foremost; then the honourd mould
Wherein this trunk was framed, and in her hand
The grandchild to her blood. But, out, affection!
All bond and privilege of nature, break!
Let it be virtuous to be obstinate.
What is that curtsy worth? or those doves eyes,
Which can make gods forsworn? I melt, and am not
Of stronger earth than others. My mother bows;
As if Olympus to a molehill should
In supplication nod: and my young boy
Hath an aspect of intercession, which
Great nature cries Deny not. let the Volsces
Plough Rome and harrow Italy: Ill never
Be such a gosling to obey instinct, but stand,
As if a man were author of himself
And knew no other kin.
