My lord and husband!
These eyes are not the same I wore in Rome.
The sorrow that delivers us thus changed
Makes you think so.
Like a dull actor now,
I have forgot my part, and I am out,
Even to a full disgrace. Best of my flesh,
Forgive my tyranny; but do not say
For that Forgive our Romans. O, a kiss
Long as my exile, sweet as my revenge!
Now, by the jealous queen of heaven, that kiss
I carried from thee, dear; and my true lip
Hath virgind it eer since. You gods! I prate,
And the most noble mother of the world
Leave unsaluted: sink, my knee, i the earth;
Kneels
Of thy deep duty more impression show
Than that of common sons.
O, stand up blest!
Whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint,
I kneel before thee; and unproperly
Show duty, as mistaken all this while
Between the child and parent.
Kneels
What is this?
Your knees to me? to your corrected son?
Then let the pebbles on the hungry beach
Fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds
Strike the proud cedars gainst the fiery sun;
Murdering impossibility, to make
What cannot be, slight work.
Thou art my warrior;
I holp to frame thee. Do you know this lady?
The noble sister of Publicola,
The moon of Rome, chaste as the icicle
Thats curdied by the frost from purest snow
And hangs on Dians temple: dear Valeria!
This is a poor epitome of yours,
Which by the interpretation of full time
May show like all yourself.
The god of soldiers,
With the consent of supreme Jove, inform
Thy thoughts with nobleness; that thou mayst prove
To shame unvulnerable, and stick i the wars
Like a great sea-mark, standing every flaw,
And saving those that eye thee!
Your knee, sirrah.
Thats my brave boy!
Even he, your wife, this lady, and myself,
Are suitors to you.
I beseech you, peace:
Or, if yould ask, remember this before:
The thing I have forsworn to grant may never
Be held by you denials. Do not bid me
Dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate
Again with Romes mechanics: tell me not
Wherein I seem unnatural: desire not
To ally my rages and revenges with
Your colder reasons.
O, no more, no more!
You have said you will not grant us any thing;
For we have nothing else to ask, but that
Which you deny already: yet we will ask;
That, if you fail in our request, the blame
May hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.
Aufidius, and you Volsces, mark; for well
Hear nought from Rome in private. Your request?
Should we be silent and not speak, our raiment
And state of bodies would bewray what life
We have led since thy exile. Think with thyself
How more unfortunate than all living women
Are we come hither: since that thy sight,
which should
Make our eyes flow with joy, hearts dance
with comforts,
Constrains them weep and shake with fear and sorrow;
Making the mother, wife and child to see
The son, the husband and the father tearing
His countrys bowels out. And to poor we
Thine enmitys most capital: thou barrst us
Our prayers to the gods, which is a comfort
That all but we enjoy; for how can we,
Alas, how can we for our country pray.
Whereto we are bound, together with thy victory,
Whereto we are bound? alack, or we must lose
The country, our dear nurse, or else thy person,
Our comfort in the country. We must find
An evident calamity, though we had
Our wish, which side should win: for either thou
Must, as a foreign recreant, be led
With manacles thorough our streets, or else
triumphantly tread on thy countrys ruin,
And bear the palm for having bravely shed
Thy wife and childrens blood. For myself, son,
I purpose not to wait on fortune till
These wars determine: if I cannot persuade thee
Rather to show a noble grace to both parts
Than seek the end of one, thou shalt no sooner
March to assault thy country than to tread--
Trust tot, thou shalt not--on thy mothers womb,
That brought thee to this world.
Ay, and mine,
That brought you forth this boy, to keep your name
Living to time.
A shall not tread on me;
Ill run away till I am bigger, but then Ill fight.
Not of a womans tenderness to be,
Requires nor child nor womans face to see.
I have sat too long.
Rising
Nay, go not from us thus.
If it were so that our request did tend
To save the Romans, thereby to destroy
The Volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us,
As poisonous of your honour: no; our suit
Is that you reconcile them: while the Volsces
May say This mercy we have showd; the Romans,
This we received; and each in either side
Give the all-hail to thee and cry Be blest
For making up this peace! Thou knowst, great son,
The end of wars uncertain, but this certain,
That, if thou conquer Rome, the benefit
Which thou shalt thereby reap is such a name,
Whose repetition will be doggd with curses;
Whose chronicle thus writ: The man was noble,
But with his last attempt he wiped it out;
Destroyd his country, and his name remains
To the ensuing age abhorrd. Speak to me, son:
Thou hast affected the fine strains of honour,
To imitate the graces of the gods;
To tear with thunder the wide cheeks o the air,
And yet to charge thy sulphur with a bolt
That should but rive an oak. Why dost not speak?
Thinkst thou it honourable for a noble man
Still to remember wrongs? Daughter, speak you:
He cares not for your weeping. Speak thou, boy:
Perhaps thy childishness will move him more
Than can our reasons. Theres no man in the world
More bound to s mother; yet here he lets me prate
Like one i the stocks. Thou hast never in thy life
Showd thy dear mother any courtesy,
When she, poor hen, fond of no second brood,
Has cluckd thee to the wars and safely home,
Loaden with honour. Say my requests unjust,
And spurn me back: but if it be not so,
Thou art not honest; and the gods will plague thee,
That thou restrainst from me the duty which
To a mothers part belongs. He turns away:
Down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees.
To his surname Coriolanus longs more pride
Than pity to our prayers. Down: an end;
This is the last: so we will home to Rome,
And die among our neighbours. Nay, behold s:
This boy, that cannot tell what he would have
But kneels and holds up bands for fellowship,
Does reason our petition with more strength
Than thou hast to deny t. Come, let us go:
This fellow had a Volscian to his mother;
His wife is in Corioli and his child
Like him by chance. Yet give us our dispatch:
I am hushd until our city be a-fire,
And then Ill speak a little.
He holds her by the hand, silent
O mother, mother!
What have you done? Behold, the heavens do ope,
The gods look down, and this unnatural scene
They laugh at. O my mother, mother! O!
You have won a happy victory to Rome;
But, for your son,--believe it, O, believe it,
Most dangerously you have with him prevaild,
If not most mortal to him. But, let it come.
Aufidius, though I cannot make true wars,
Ill frame convenient peace. Now, good Aufidius,
Were you in my stead, would you have heard
A mother less? or granted less, Aufidius?
I was moved withal.
I dare be sworn you were:
And, sir, it is no little thing to make
Mine eyes to sweat compassion. But, good sir,
What peace youll make, advise me: for my part,
Ill not to Rome, Ill back with you; and pray you,
Stand to me in this cause. O mother! wife!
[Aside]  I am glad thou hast set thy mercy and
thy honour
At difference in thee: out of that Ill work
Myself a former fortune.
The Ladies make signs to CORIOLANUS
Ay, by and by;
To VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA,  and c
But we will drink together; and you shall bear
A better witness back than words, which we,
On like conditions, will have counter-seald.
Come, enter with us. Ladies, you deserve
To have a temple built you: all the swords
In Italy, and her confederate arms,
Could not have made this peace.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Rome. A public place.
Enter MENENIUS and SICINIUS
See you yond coign o the Capitol, yond
corner-stone?
Why, what of that?
If it be possible for you to displace it with your
little finger, there is some hope the ladies of
Rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him.
But I say there is no hope int: our throats are
sentenced and stay upon execution.
Ist possible that so short a time can alter the
condition of a man!
There is differency between a grub and a butterfly;
yet your butterfly was a grub. This Marcius is grown
from man to dragon: he has wings; hes more than a
creeping thing.
He loved his mother dearly.
So did he me: and he no more remembers his mother
now than an eight-year-old horse. The tartness
of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he
moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before
his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet with
his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a
battery. He sits in his state, as a thing made for
Alexander. What he bids be done is finished with
his bidding. He wants nothing of a god but eternity
and a heaven to throne in.
Yes, mercy, if you report him truly.
I paint him in the character. Mark what mercy his
mother shall bring from him: there is no more mercy
in him than there is milk in a male tiger; that
shall our poor city find: and all this is long of
you.
The gods be good unto us!
No, in such a case the gods will not be good unto
us. When we banished him, we respected not them;
and, he returning to break our necks, they respect not us.
Enter a Messenger
Sir, if yould save your life, fly to your house:
The plebeians have got your fellow-tribune
And hale him up and down, all swearing, if
The Roman ladies bring not comfort home,
Theyll give him death by inches.
Enter a second Messenger
Whats the news?
Good news, good news; the ladies have prevaild,
The Volscians are dislodged, and Marcius gone:
A merrier day did never yet greet Rome,
No, not the expulsion of the Tarquins.
Friend,
Art thou certain this is true? is it most certain?
As certain as I know the sun is fire:
Where have you lurkd, that you make doubt of it?
Neer through an arch so hurried the blown tide,
As the recomforted through the gates. Why, hark you!
Trumpets; hautboys; drums beat; all together
The trumpets, sackbuts, psalteries and fifes,
Tabours and cymbals and the shouting Romans,
Make the sun dance. Hark you!
A shout within
This is good news:
I will go meet the ladies. This Volumnia
Is worth of consuls, senators, patricians,
A city full; of tribunes, such as you,
A sea and land full. You have prayd well to-day:
This morning for ten thousand of your throats
Id not have given a doit. Hark, how they joy!
Music still, with shouts
First, the gods bless you for your tidings; next,
Accept my thankfulness.
Sir, we have all
Great cause to give great thanks.
They are near the city?
Almost at point to enter.
We will meet them,
And help the joy.
Exeunt
SCENE V. The same. A street near the gate.
Enter two Senators with VOLUMNIA, VIRGILIA,  VALERIA,  and c. passing over the stage, followed by Patricians and others
Behold our patroness, the life of Rome!
Call all your tribes together, praise the gods,
And make triumphant fires; strew flowers before them:
Unshout the noise that banishd Marcius,
Repeal him with the welcome of his mother;
Cry Welcome, ladies, welcome!
Welcome, ladies, Welcome!
A flourish with drums and trumpets. Exeunt
SCENE VI. Antium. A public place.
Enter TULLUS AUFIDIUS, with Attendants
Go tell the lords o the city I am here:
Deliver them this paper: having read it,
Bid them repair to the market place; where I,
Even in theirs and in the commons ears,
Will vouch the truth of it. Him I accuse
The city ports by this hath enterd and
Intends to appear before the people, hoping
To purge herself with words: dispatch.
Exeunt Attendants
Enter three or four Conspirators of AUFIDIUS faction
Most welcome!
How is it with our general?
Even so
As with a man by his own alms empoisond,
And with his charity slain.
Most noble sir,
If you do hold the same intent wherein
You wishd us parties, well deliver you
Of your great danger.
Sir, I cannot tell:
We must proceed as we do find the people.
The people will remain uncertain whilst
Twixt you theres difference; but the fall of either
Makes the survivor heir of all.
I know it;
And my pretext to strike at him admits
A good construction. I raised him, and I pawnd
Mine honour for his truth: who being so heightend,
He waterd his new plants with dews of flattery,
Seducing so my friends; and, to this end,
He bowd his nature, never known before
But to be rough, unswayable and free.
Sir, his stoutness
When he did stand for consul, which he lost
By lack of stooping,--
That I would have spoke of:
Being banishd fort, he came unto my hearth;
Presented to my knife his throat: I took him;
Made him joint-servant with me; gave him way
In all his own desires; nay, let him choose
Out of my files, his projects to accomplish,
My best and freshest men; served his designments
In mine own person; holp to reap the fame
Which he did end all his; and took some pride
To do myself this wrong: till, at the last,
I seemd his follower, not partner, and
He waged me with his countenance, as if
I had been mercenary.
So he did, my lord:
The army marvelld at it, and, in the last,
When he had carried Rome and that we lookd
For no less spoil than glory,--
There was it:
For which my sinews shall be stretchd upon him.
At a few drops of womens rheum, which are
As cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour
Of our great action: therefore shall he die,
And Ill renew me in his fall. But, hark!
Drums and trumpets sound, with great shouts of the People
Your native town you enterd like a post,
And had no welcomes home: but he returns,
Splitting the air with noise.
And patient fools,
Whose children he hath slain, their base throats tear
With giving him glory.
Therefore, at your vantage,
Ere he express himself, or move the people
With what he would say, let him feel your sword,
Which we will second. When he lies along,
After your way his tale pronounced shall bury
His reasons with his body.
Say no more:
Here come the lords.
Enter the Lords of the city
You are most welcome home.
I have not deserved it.
But, worthy lords, have you with heed perused
What I have written to you?
We have.
And grieve to heart.
What faults he made before the last, I think
Might have found easy fines: but there to end
Where he was to begin and give away
The benefit of our levies, answering us
With our own charge, making a treaty where
There was a yielding,--this admits no excuse.
He approaches: you shall hear him.
Enter CORIOLANUS, marching with drum and colours; commoners being with him
Hail, lords! I am returnd your soldier,
No more infected with my countrys love
Than when I parted hence, but still subsisting
Under your great command. You are to know
That prosperously I have attempted and
With bloody passage led your wars even to
The gates of Rome. Our spoils we have brought home
Do more than counterpoise a full third part
The charges of the action. We have made peace
With no less honour to the Antiates
Than shame to the Romans: and we here deliver,
Subscribed by the consuls and patricians,
Together with the seal o the senate, what
We have compounded on.
Read it not, noble lords;
But tell the traitor, in the highst degree
He hath abused your powers.
Traitor! how now!
Ay, traitor, Marcius!
Marcius!
Ay, Marcius, Caius Marcius: dost thou think
Ill grace thee with that robbery, thy stoln name
Coriolanus in Corioli?
You lords and heads o the state, perfidiously
He has betrayd your business, and given up,
For certain drops of salt, your city Rome,
I say your city, to his wife and mother;
Breaking his oath and resolution like
A twist of rotten silk, never admitting
Counsel o the war, but at his nurses tears
He whined and roard away your victory,
That pages blushd at him and men of heart
Lookd wondering each at other.
Hearst thou, Mars?
Name not the god, thou boy of tears!
Ha!
No more.
Measureless liar, thou hast made my heart
Too great for what contains it. Boy! O slave!
Pardon me, lords, tis the first time that ever
I was forced to scold. Your judgments, my grave lords,
Must give this cur the lie: and his own notion--
Who wears my stripes impressd upon him; that
Must bear my beating to his grave--shall join
To thrust the lie unto him.
Peace, both, and hear me speak.
Cut me to pieces, Volsces; men and lads,
Stain all your edges on me. Boy! false hound!
If you have writ your annals true, tis there,
That, like an eagle in a dove-cote, I
Flutterd your Volscians in Corioli:
Alone I did it. Boy!
Why, noble lords,
Will you be put in mind of his blind fortune,
Which was your shame, by this unholy braggart,
Fore your own eyes and ears?
Let him die fort.
Tear him to pieces. Do it presently. He killd
my son. My daughter. He killed my cousin
Marcus. He killed my father.
Peace, ho! no outrage: peace!
The man is noble and his fame folds-in
This orb o the earth. His last offences to us
Shall have judicious hearing. Stand, Aufidius,
And trouble not the peace.
O that I had him,
With six Aufidiuses, or more, his tribe,
To use my lawful sword!
Insolent villain!
Kill, kill, kill, kill, kill him!
The Conspirators draw, and kill CORIOLANUS: AUFIDIUS stands on his body
Hold, hold, hold, hold!
My noble masters, hear me speak.
O Tullus,--
Thou hast done a deed whereat valour will weep.
Tread not upon him. Masters all, be quiet;
Put up your swords.
My lords, when you shall know--as in this rage,
Provoked by him, you cannot--the great danger
Which this mans life did owe you, youll rejoice
That he is thus cut off. Please it your honours
To call me to your senate, Ill deliver
Myself your loyal servant, or endure
Your heaviest censure.
Bear from hence his body;
And mourn you for him: let him be regarded
As the most noble corse that ever herald
Did follow to his urn.
His own impatience
Takes from Aufidius a great part of blame.
Lets make the best of it.
My rage is gone;
And I am struck with sorrow. Take him up.
Help, three o the chiefest soldiers; Ill be one.
Beat thou the drum, that it speak mournfully:
Trail your steel pikes. Though in this city he
Hath widowd and unchilded many a one,
Which to this hour bewail the injury,
Yet he shall have a noble memory. Assist.
Exeunt, bearing the body of CORIOLANUS. A dead march sounded
ACT I
SCENE I. Britain. The garden of Cymbelines palace.
Enter two Gentlemen
You do not meet a man but frowns: our bloods
No more obey the heavens than our courtiers
Still seem as does the king.
But whats the matter?
His daughter, and the heir ofs kingdom, whom
He purposed to his wifes sole son--a widow
That late he married--hath referrd herself
Unto a poor but worthy gentleman: shes wedded;
Her husband banishd; she imprisond: all
Is outward sorrow; though I think the king
Be touchd at very heart.
None but the king?
He that hath lost her too; so is the queen,
That most desired the match; but not a courtier,
Although they wear their faces to the bent
Of the kings looks, hath a heart that is not
Glad at the thing they scowl at.
And why so?
He that hath missd the princess is a thing
Too bad for bad report: and he that hath her--
I mean, that married her, alack, good man!
And therefore banishd--is a creature such
As, to seek through the regions of the earth
For one his like, there would be something failing
In him that should compare. I do not think
So fair an outward and such stuff within
Endows a man but he.
You speak him far.
I do extend him, sir, within himself,
Crush him together rather than unfold
His measure duly.
Whats his name and birth?
I cannot delve him to the root: his father
Was calld Sicilius, who did join his honour
Against the Romans with Cassibelan,
But had his titles by Tenantius whom
He served with glory and admired success,
So gaind the sur-addition Leonatus;
And had, besides this gentleman in question,
Two other sons, who in the wars o the time
Died with their swords in hand; for which
their father,
Then old and fond of issue, took such sorrow
That he quit being, and his gentle lady,
Big of this gentleman our theme, deceased
As he was born. The king he takes the babe
To his protection, calls him Posthumus Leonatus,
Breeds him and makes him of his bed-chamber,
Puts to him all the learnings that his time
Could make him the receiver of; which he took,
As we do air, fast as twas ministerd,
And ins spring became a harvest, lived in court--
Which rare it is to do--most praised, most loved,
A sample to the youngest, to the more mature
A glass that feated them, and to the graver
A child that guided dotards; to his mistress,
For whom he now is banishd, her own price
Proclaims how she esteemd him and his virtue;
By her election may be truly read
What kind of man he is.
I honour him
Even out of your report. But, pray you, tell me,
Is she sole child to the king?
His only child.
He had two sons: if this be worth your hearing,
Mark it: the eldest of them at three years old,
I the swathing-clothes the other, from their nursery
Were stoln, and to this hour no guess in knowledge
Which way they went.
How long is this ago?
Some twenty years.
That a kings children should be so conveyd,
So slackly guarded, and the search so slow,
That could not trace them!
Howsoeer tis strange,
Or that the negligence may well be laughd at,
Yet is it true, sir.
I do well believe you.
We must forbear: here comes the gentleman,
The queen, and princess.
Exeunt
Enter the QUEEN, POSTHUMUS LEONATUS, and IMOGEN
No, be assured you shall not find me, daughter,
After the slander of most stepmothers,
Evil-eyed unto you: youre my prisoner, but
Your gaoler shall deliver you the keys
That lock up your restraint. For you, Posthumus,
So soon as I can win the offended king,
I will be known your advocate: marry, yet
The fire of rage is in him, and twere good
You leand unto his sentence with what patience
Your wisdom may inform you.
Please your highness,
I will from hence to-day.
You know the peril.
Ill fetch a turn about the garden, pitying
The pangs of barrd affections, though the king
Hath charged you should not speak together.
Exit
O
Dissembling courtesy! How fine this tyrant
Can tickle where she wounds! My dearest husband,
I something fear my fathers wrath; but nothing--
Always reserved my holy duty--what
His rage can do on me: you must be gone;
And I shall here abide the hourly shot
Of angry eyes, not comforted to live,
But that there is this jewel in the world
That I may see again.
My queen! my mistress!
O lady, weep no more, lest I give cause
To be suspected of more tenderness
Than doth become a man. I will remain
The loyalst husband that did eer plight troth:
My residence in Rome at one Philarios,
Who to my father was a friend, to me
Known but by letter: thither write, my queen,
And with mine eyes Ill drink the words you send,
Though ink be made of gall.
Re-enter QUEEN
Be brief, I pray you:
If the king come, I shall incur I know not
How much of his displeasure.
Aside
Yet Ill move him
To walk this way: I never do him wrong,
But he does buy my injuries, to be friends;
Pays dear for my offences.
Exit
Should we be taking leave
As long a term as yet we have to live,
The loathness to depart would grow. Adieu!
Nay, stay a little:
Were you but riding forth to air yourself,
Such parting were too petty. Look here, love;
This diamond was my mothers: take it, heart;
But keep it till you woo another wife,
When Imogen is dead.
How, how! another?
You gentle gods, give me but this I have,
And sear up my embracements from a next
With bonds of death!
Putting on the ring
Remain, remain thou here
While sense can keep it on. And, sweetest, fairest,
As I my poor self did exchange for you,
To your so infinite loss, so in our trifles
I still win of you: for my sake wear this;
It is a manacle of love; Ill place it
Upon this fairest prisoner.
Putting a bracelet upon her arm
O the gods!
When shall we see again?
Enter CYMBELINE and Lords
Alack, the king!
Thou basest thing, avoid! hence, from my sight!
If after this command thou fraught the court
With thy unworthiness, thou diest: away!
Thourt poison to my blood.
The gods protect you!
And bless the good remainders of the court! I am gone.
Exit
There cannot be a pinch in death
More sharp than this is.
O disloyal thing,
That shouldst repair my youth, thou heapst
A years age on me.
I beseech you, sir,
Harm not yourself with your vexation
I am senseless of your wrath; a touch more rare
Subdues all pangs, all fears.
Past grace? obedience?
Past hope, and in despair; that way, past grace.
That mightst have had the sole son of my queen!
O blest, that I might not! I chose an eagle,
And did avoid a puttock.
Thou tookst a beggar; wouldst have made my throne
A seat for baseness.
No; I rather added
A lustre to it.
O thou vile one!
Sir,
It is your fault that I have loved Posthumus:
You bred him as my playfellow, and he is
A man worth any woman, overbuys me
Almost the sum he pays.
What, art thou mad?
Almost, sir: heaven restore me! Would I were
A neat-herds daughter, and my Leonatus
Our neighbour shepherds son!
Thou foolish thing!
Re-enter QUEEN
They were again together: you have done
Not after our command. Away with her,
And pen her up.
Beseech your patience. Peace,
Dear lady daughter, peace! Sweet sovereign,
Leave us to ourselves; and make yourself some comfort
Out of your best advice.
Nay, let her languish
A drop of blood a day; and, being aged,
Die of this folly!
Exeunt CYMBELINE and Lords
Fie! you must give way.
Enter PISANIO
Here is your servant. How now, sir! What news?
My lord your son drew on my master.
Ha!
No harm, I trust, is done?
There might have been,
But that my master rather playd than fought
And had no help of anger: they were parted
By gentlemen at hand.
I am very glad ont.
Your sons my fathers friend; he takes his part.
To draw upon an exile! O brave sir!
I would they were in Afric both together;
Myself by with a needle, that I might prick
The goer-back. Why came you from your master?
On his command: he would not suffer me
To bring him to the haven; left these notes
Of what commands I should be subject to,
When t pleased you to employ me.
This hath been
Your faithful servant: I dare lay mine honour
He will remain so.
I humbly thank your highness.
Pray, walk awhile.
About some half-hour hence,
I pray you, speak with me: you shall at least
Go see my lord aboard: for this time leave me.
Exeunt
SCENE II. The same. A public place.
Enter CLOTEN and two Lords
Sir, I would advise you to shift a shirt; the
violence of action hath made you reek as a
sacrifice: where air comes out, air comes in:
theres none abroad so wholesome as that you vent.
If my shirt were bloody, then to shift it. Have I hurt him?
[Aside]  No, faith; not so much as his patience.
Hurt him! his bodys a passable carcass, if he be
not hurt: it is a thoroughfare for steel, if it be not hurt.
[Aside]  His steel was in debt; it went o the
backside the town.
The villain would not stand me.
[Aside]  No; but he fled forward still, toward your face.
Stand you! You have land enough of your own: but
he added to your having; gave you some ground.
[Aside]  As many inches as you have oceans. Puppies!
I would they had not come between us.
[Aside]  So would I, till you had measured how long
a fool you were upon the ground.
And that she should love this fellow and refuse me!
[Aside]  If it be a sin to make a true election, she
is damned.
Sir, as I told you always, her beauty and her brain
go not together: shes a good sign, but I have seen
small reflection of her wit.
[Aside]  She shines not upon fools, lest the
reflection should hurt her.
Come, Ill to my chamber. Would there had been some
hurt done!
[Aside]  I wish not so; unless it had been the fall
of an ass, which is no great hurt.
Youll go with us?
Ill attend your lordship.
Nay, come, lets go together.
Well, my lord.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A room in Cymbelines palace.
Enter IMOGEN and PISANIO
I would thou grewst unto the shores o the haven,
And questiondst every sail: if he should write
And not have it, twere a paper lost,
As offerd mercy is. What was the last
That he spake to thee?
It was his queen, his queen!
Then waved his handkerchief?
And kissd it, madam.
Senseless Linen! happier therein than I!
And that was all?
No, madam; for so long
As he could make me with this eye or ear
Distinguish him from others, he did keep
The deck, with glove, or hat, or handkerchief,
Still waving, as the fits and stirs of s mind
Could best express how slow his soul saild on,
How swift his ship.
Thou shouldst have made him
As little as a crow, or less, ere left
To after-eye him.
Madam, so I did.
I would have broke mine eye-strings; crackd them, but
To look upon him, till the diminution
Of space had pointed him sharp as my needle,
Nay, followd him, till he had melted from
The smallness of a gnat to air, and then
Have turnd mine eye and wept. But, good Pisanio,
When shall we hear from him?
Be assured, madam,
With his next vantage.
I did not take my leave of him, but had
Most pretty things to say: ere I could tell him
How I would think on him at certain hours
Such thoughts and such, or I could make him swear
The shes of Italy should not betray
Mine interest and his honour, or have charged him,
At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight,
To encounter me with orisons, for then
I am in heaven for him; or ere I could
Give him that parting kiss which I had set
Betwixt two charming words, comes in my father
And like the tyrannous breathing of the north
Shakes all our buds from growing.
Enter a Lady
The queen, madam,
Desires your highness company.
Those things I bid you do, get them dispatchd.
I will attend the queen.
Madam, I shall.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. Rome. Philarios house.
Enter PHILARIO, IACHIMO, a Frenchman, a Dutchman, and a Spaniard
Believe it, sir, I have seen him in Britain: he was
then of a crescent note, expected to prove so worthy
as since he hath been allowed the name of; but I
could then have looked on him without the help of
admiration, though the catalogue of his endowments
had been tabled by his side and I to peruse him by items.
You speak of him when he was less furnished than now
he is with that which makes him both without and within.
I have seen him in France: we had very many there
could behold the sun with as firm eyes as he.
This matter of marrying his kings daughter, wherein
he must be weighed rather by her value than his own,
words him, I doubt not, a great deal from the matter.
And then his banishment.
Ay, and the approbation of those that weep this
lamentable divorce under her colours are wonderfully
to extend him; be it but to fortify her judgment,
which else an easy battery might lay flat, for
taking a beggar without less quality. But how comes
it he is to sojourn with you? How creeps
acquaintance?
His father and I were soldiers together; to whom I
have been often bound for no less than my life.
Here comes the Briton: let him be so entertained
amongst you as suits, with gentlemen of your
knowing, to a stranger of his quality.
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS
I beseech you all, be better known to this
gentleman; whom I commend to you as a noble friend
of mine: how worthy he is I will leave to appear
hereafter, rather than story him in his own hearing.
Sir, we have known together in Orleans.
Since when I have been debtor to you for courtesies,
which I will be ever to pay and yet pay still.
Sir, you oer-rate my poor kindness: I was glad I
did atone my countryman and you; it had been pity
you should have been put together with so mortal a
purpose as then each bore, upon importance of so
slight and trivial a nature.
By your pardon, sir, I was then a young traveller;
rather shunned to go even with what I heard than in
my every action to be guided by others experiences:
but upon my mended judgment--if I offend not to say
it is mended--my quarrel was not altogether slight.
Faith, yes, to be put to the arbitrement of swords,
and by such two that would by all likelihood have
confounded one the other, or have fallen both.
Can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
Safely, I think: twas a contention in public,
which may, without contradiction, suffer the report.
It was much like an argument that fell out last
night, where each of us fell in praise of our
country mistresses; this gentleman at that time
vouching--and upon warrant of bloody
affirmation--his to be more fair, virtuous, wise,
chaste, constant-qualified and less attemptable
than any the rarest of our ladies in France.
That lady is not now living, or this gentlemans
opinion by this worn out.
She holds her virtue still and I my mind.
You must not so far prefer her fore ours of Italy.
Being so far provoked as I was in France, I would
abate her nothing, though I profess myself her
adorer, not her friend.
As fair and as good--a kind of hand-in-hand
comparison--had been something too fair and too good
for any lady in Britain. If she went before others
I have seen, as that diamond of yours outlustres
many I have beheld. I could not but believe she
excelled many: but I have not seen the most
precious diamond that is, nor you the lady.
I praised her as I rated her: so do I my stone.
What do you esteem it at?
More than the world enjoys.
Either your unparagoned mistress is dead, or shes
outprized by a trifle.
You are mistaken: the one may be sold, or given, if
there were wealth enough for the purchase, or merit
for the gift: the other is not a thing for sale,
and only the gift of the gods.
Which the gods have given you?
Which, by their graces, I will keep.
You may wear her in title yours: but, you know,
strange fowl light upon neighbouring ponds. Your
ring may be stolen too: so your brace of unprizable
estimations; the one is but frail and the other
casual; a cunning thief, or a that way accomplished
courtier, would hazard the winning both of first and last.
Your Italy contains none so accomplished a courtier
to convince the honour of my mistress, if, in the
holding or loss of that, you term her frail. I do
nothing doubt you have store of thieves;
notwithstanding, I fear not my ring.
Let us leave here, gentlemen.
Sir, with all my heart. This worthy signior, I
thank him, makes no stranger of me; we are familiar at first.
With five times so much conversation, I should get
ground of your fair mistress, make her go back, even
to the yielding, had I admittance and opportunity to friend.
No, no.
I dare thereupon pawn the moiety of my estate to
your ring; which, in my opinion, oervalues it
something: but I make my wager rather against your
confidence than her reputation: and, to bar your
offence herein too, I durst attempt it against any
lady in the world.
You are a great deal abused in too bold a
persuasion; and I doubt not you sustain what youre
worthy of by your attempt.
Whats that?
A repulse: though your attempt, as you call it,
deserve more; a punishment too.
Gentlemen, enough of this: it came in too suddenly;
let it die as it was born, and, I pray you, be
better acquainted.
Would I had put my estate and my neighbours on the
approbation of what I have spoke!
What lady would you choose to assail?
Yours; whom in constancy you think stands so safe.
I will lay you ten thousand ducats to your ring,
that, commend me to the court where your lady is,
with no more advantage than the opportunity of a
second conference, and I will bring from thence
that honour of hers which you imagine so reserved.
I will wage against your gold, gold to it: my ring
I hold dear as my finger; tis part of it.
You are afraid, and therein the wiser. If you buy
ladies flesh at a million a dram, you cannot
preserve it from tainting: but I see you have some
religion in you, that you fear.
This is but a custom in your tongue; you bear a
graver purpose, I hope.
I am the master of my speeches, and would undergo
whats spoken, I swear.
Will you? I shall but lend my diamond till your
return: let there be covenants drawn betweens: my
mistress exceeds in goodness the hugeness of your
unworthy thinking: I dare you to this match: heres my ring.
I will have it no lay.
By the gods, it is one. If I bring you no
sufficient testimony that I have enjoyed the dearest
bodily part of your mistress, my ten thousand ducats
are yours; so is your diamond too: if I come off,
and leave her in such honour as you have trust in,
she your jewel, this your jewel, and my gold are
yours: provided I have your commendation for my more
free entertainment.
I embrace these conditions; let us have articles
betwixt us. Only, thus far you shall answer: if
you make your voyage upon her and give me directly
to understand you have prevailed, I am no further
your enemy; she is not worth our debate: if she
remain unseduced, you not making it appear
otherwise, for your ill opinion and the assault you
have made to her chastity you shall answer me with
your sword.
Your hand; a covenant: we will have these things set
down by lawful counsel, and straight away for
Britain, lest the bargain should catch cold and
starve: I will fetch my gold and have our two
wagers recorded.
Agreed.
Exeunt POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and IACHIMO
Will this hold, think you?
Signior Iachimo will not from it.
Pray, let us follow em.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Britain. A room in Cymbelines palace.
Enter QUEEN, Ladies, and CORNELIUS
Whiles yet the dews on ground, gather those flowers;
Make haste: who has the note of them?
I, madam.
Dispatch.
Exeunt Ladies
Now, master doctor, have you brought those drugs?
Pleaseth your highness, ay: here they are, madam:
Presenting a small box
But I beseech your grace, without offence,--
My conscience bids me ask--wherefore you have
Commanded of me those most poisonous compounds,
Which are the movers of a languishing death;
But though slow, deadly?
I wonder, doctor,
Thou askst me such a question. Have I not been
Thy pupil long? Hast thou not learnd me how
To make perfumes? distil? preserve? yea, so
That our great king himself doth woo me oft
For my confections? Having thus far proceeded,--
Unless thou thinkst me devilish--ist not meet
That I did amplify my judgment in
Other conclusions? I will try the forces
Of these thy compounds on such creatures as
We count not worth the hanging, but none human,
To try the vigour of them and apply
Allayments to their act, and by them gather
Their several virtues and effects.
Your highness
Shall from this practise but make hard your heart:
Besides, the seeing these effects will be
Both noisome and infectious.
