O, content thee.
Enter PISANIO
Aside
Here comes a flattering rascal; upon him
Will I first work: hes for his master,
An enemy to my son. How now, Pisanio!
Doctor, your service for this time is ended;
Take your own way.
[Aside]          I do suspect you, madam;
But you shall do no harm.
[To PISANIO]            Hark thee, a word.
[Aside]  I do not like her. She doth think she has
Strange lingering poisons: I do know her spirit,
And will not trust one of her malice with
A drug of such damnd nature. Those she has
Will stupefy and dull the sense awhile;
Which first, perchance, shell prove on
cats and dogs,
Then afterward up higher: but there is
No danger in what show of death it makes,
More than the locking-up the spirits a time,
To be more fresh, reviving. She is foold
With a most false effect; and I the truer,
So to be false with her.
No further service, doctor,
Until I send for thee.
I humbly take my leave.
Exit
Weeps she still, sayst thou? Dost thou think in time
She will not quench and let instructions enter
Where folly now possesses? Do thou work:
When thou shalt bring me word she loves my son,
Ill tell thee on the instant thou art then
As great as is thy master, greater, for
His fortunes all lie speechless and his name
Is at last gasp: return he cannot, nor
Continue where he is: to shift his being
Is to exchange one misery with another,
And every day that comes comes to decay
A days work in him. What shalt thou expect,
To be depender on a thing that leans,
Who cannot be new built, nor has no friends,
So much as but to prop him?
The QUEEN drops the box: PISANIO takes it up
Thou takest up
Thou knowst not what; but take it for thy labour:
It is a thing I made, which hath the king
Five times redeemd from death: I do not know
What is more cordial. Nay, I prethee, take it;
It is an earnest of a further good
That I mean to thee. Tell thy mistress how
The case stands with her; dot as from thyself.
Think what a chance thou changest on, but think
Thou hast thy mistress still, to boot, my son,
Who shall take notice of thee: Ill move the king
To any shape of thy preferment such
As thoult desire; and then myself, I chiefly,
That set thee on to this desert, am bound
To load thy merit richly. Call my women:
Think on my words.
Exit PISANIO
A sly and constant knave,
Not to be shaked; the agent for his master
And the remembrancer of her to hold
The hand-fast to her lord. I have given him that
Which, if he take, shall quite unpeople her
Of liegers for her sweet, and which she after,
Except she bend her humour, shall be assured
To taste of too.
Re-enter PISANIO and Ladies
So, so: well done, well done:
The violets, cowslips, and the primroses,
Bear to my closet. Fare thee well, Pisanio;
Think on my words.
Exeunt QUEEN and Ladies
And shall do:
But when to my good lord I prove untrue,
Ill choke myself: theres all Ill do for you.
Exit
SCENE VI. The same. Another room in the palace.
Enter IMOGEN
A father cruel, and a step-dame false;
A foolish suitor to a wedded lady,
That hath her husband banishd;--O, that husband!
My supreme crown of grief! and those repeated
Vexations of it! Had I been thief-stoln,
As my two brothers, happy! but most miserable
Is the desire thats glorious: blest be those,
How mean soeer, that have their honest wills,
Which seasons comfort. Who may this be? Fie!
Enter PISANIO and IACHIMO
Madam, a noble gentleman of Rome,
Comes from my lord with letters.
Change you, madam?
The worthy Leonatus is in safety
And greets your highness dearly.
Presents a letter
Thanks, good sir:
Youre kindly welcome.
[Aside]  All of her that is out of door most rich!
If she be furnishd with a mind so rare,
She is alone the Arabian bird, and I
Have lost the wager. Boldness be my friend!
Arm me, audacity, from head to foot!
Or, like the Parthian, I shall flying fight;
Rather directly fly.
[Reads]  He is one of the noblest note, to whose
kindnesses I am most infinitely tied. Reflect upon
him accordingly, as you value your trust--
LEONATUS.
So far I read aloud:
But even the very middle of my heart
Is warmd by the rest, and takes it thankfully.
You are as welcome, worthy sir, as I
Have words to bid you, and shall find it so
In all that I can do.
Thanks, fairest lady.
What, are men mad? Hath nature given them eyes
To see this vaulted arch, and the rich crop
Of sea and land, which can distinguish twixt
The fiery orbs above and the twinnd stones
Upon the numberd beach? and can we not
Partition make with spectacles so precious
Twixt fair and foul?
What makes your admiration?
It cannot be i the eye, for apes and monkeys
Twixt two such shes would chatter this way and
Contemn with mows the other; nor i the judgment,
For idiots in this case of favour would
Be wisely definite; nor i the appetite;
Sluttery to such neat excellence opposed
Should make desire vomit emptiness,
Not so allured to feed.
What is the matter, trow?
The cloyed will,
That satiate yet unsatisfied desire, that tub
Both filld and running, ravening first the lamb
Longs after for the garbage.
What, dear sir,
Thus raps you? Are you well?
Thanks, madam; well.
To PISANIO
Beseech you, sir, desire
My mans abode where I did leave him: he
Is strange and peevish.
I was going, sir,
To give him welcome.
Exit
Continues well my lord? His health, beseech you?
Well, madam.
Is he disposed to mirth? I hope he is.
Exceeding pleasant; none a stranger there
So merry and so gamesome: he is calld
The Briton reveller.
When he was here,
He did incline to sadness, and oft-times
Not knowing why.
I never saw him sad.
There is a Frenchman his companion, one
An eminent monsieur, that, it seems, much loves
A Gallian girl at home; he furnaces
The thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly Briton--
Your lord, I mean--laughs froms free lungs, cries O,
Can my sides hold, to think that man, who knows
By history, report, or his own proof,
What woman is, yea, what she cannot choose
But must be, will his free hours languish for
Assured bondage?
Will my lord say so?
Ay, madam, with his eyes in flood with laughter:
It is a recreation to be by
And hear him mock the Frenchman. But, heavens know,
Some men are much to blame.
Not he, I hope.
Not he: but yet heavens bounty towards him might
Be used more thankfully. In himself, tis much;
In you, which I account his beyond all talents,
Whilst I am bound to wonder, I am bound
To pity too.
What do you pity, sir?
Two creatures heartily.
Am I one, sir?
You look on me: what wreck discern you in me
Deserves your pity?
Lamentable! What,
To hide me from the radiant sun and solace
I the dungeon by a snuff?
I pray you, sir,
Deliver with more openness your answers
To my demands. Why do you pity me?
That others do--
I was about to say--enjoy your--But
It is an office of the gods to venge it,
Not mine to speak on t.
You do seem to know
Something of me, or what concerns me: pray you,--
Since doubling things go ill often hurts more
Than to be sure they do; for certainties
Either are past remedies, or, timely knowing,
The remedy then born--discover to me
What both you spur and stop.
Had I this cheek
To bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch,
Whose every touch, would force the feelers soul
To the oath of loyalty; this object, which
Takes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye,
Fixing it only here; should I, damnd then,
Slaver with lips as common as the stairs
That mount the Capitol; join gripes with hands
Made hard with hourly falsehood--falsehood, as
With labour; then by-peeping in an eye
Base and unlustrous as the smoky light
Thats fed with stinking tallow; it were fit
That all the plagues of hell should at one time
Encounter such revolt.
My lord, I fear,
Has forgot Britain.
And himself. Not I,
Inclined to this intelligence, pronounce
The beggary of his change; but tis your graces
That from pay mutest conscience to my tongue
Charms this report out.
Let me hear no more.
O dearest soul! your cause doth strike my heart
With pity, that doth make me sick. A lady
So fair, and fastend to an empery,
Would make the greatst king double,--to be partnerd
With tomboys hired with that self-exhibition
Which your own coffers yield! with diseased ventures
That play with all infirmities for gold
Which rottenness can lend nature! such boild stuff
As well might poison poison! Be revenged;
Or she that bore you was no queen, and you
Recoil from your great stock.
Revenged!
How should I be revenged? If this be true,--
As I have such a heart that both mine ears
Must not in haste abuse--if it be true,
How should I be revenged?
Should he make me
Live, like Dianas priest, betwixt cold sheets,
Whiles he is vaulting variable ramps,
In your despite, upon your purse? Revenge it.
I dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure,
More noble than that runagate to your bed,
And will continue fast to your affection,
Still close as sure.
What, ho, Pisanio!
Let me my service tender on your lips.
Away! I do condemn mine ears that have
So long attended thee. If thou wert honourable,
Thou wouldst have told this tale for virtue, not
For such an end thou seekst,--as base as strange.
Thou wrongst a gentleman, who is as far
From thy report as thou from honour, and
Solicitst here a lady that disdains
Thee and the devil alike. What ho, Pisanio!
The king my father shall be made acquainted
Of thy assault: if he shall think it fit,
A saucy stranger in his court to mart
As in a Romish stew and to expound
His beastly mind to us, he hath a court
He little cares for and a daughter who
He not respects at all. What, ho, Pisanio!
O happy Leonatus! I may say
The credit that thy lady hath of thee
Deserves thy trust, and thy most perfect goodness
Her assured credit. Blessed live you long!
A lady to the worthiest sir that ever
Country calld his! and you his mistress, only
For the most worthiest fit! Give me your pardon.
I have spoke this, to know if your affiance
Were deeply rooted; and shall make your lord,
That which he is, new oer: and he is one
The truest mannerd; such a holy witch
That he enchants societies into him;
Half all mens hearts are his.
You make amends.
He sits mongst men like a descended god:
He hath a kind of honour sets him off,
More than a mortal seeming. Be not angry,
Most mighty princess, that I have adventured
To try your taking a false report; which hath
Honourd with confirmation your great judgment
In the election of a sir so rare,
Which you know cannot err: the love I bear him
Made me to fan you thus, but the gods made you,
Unlike all others, chaffless. Pray, your pardon.
Alls well, sir: take my power i the court
for yours.
My humble thanks. I had almost forgot
To entreat your grace but in a small request,
And yet of moment to, for it concerns
Your lord; myself and other noble friends,
Are partners in the business.
Pray, what ist?
Some dozen Romans of us and your lord--
The best feather of our wing--have mingled sums
To buy a present for the emperor
Which I, the factor for the rest, have done
In France: tis plate of rare device, and jewels
Of rich and exquisite form; their values great;
And I am something curious, being strange,
To have them in safe stowage: may it please you
To take them in protection?
Willingly;
And pawn mine honour for their safety: since
My lord hath interest in them, I will keep them
In my bedchamber.
They are in a trunk,
Attended by my men: I will make bold
To send them to you, only for this night;
I must aboard to-morrow.
O, no, no.
Yes, I beseech; or I shall short my word
By lengthening my return. From Gallia
I crossd the seas on purpose and on promise
To see your grace.
I thank you for your pains:
But not away to-morrow!
O, I must, madam:
Therefore I shall beseech you, if you please
To greet your lord with writing, dot to-night:
I have outstood my time; which is material
To the tender of our present.
I will write.
Send your trunk to me; it shall safe be kept,
And truly yielded you. Youre very welcome.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. Britain. Before Cymbelines palace.
Enter CLOTEN and two Lords
Was there ever man had such luck! when I kissed the
jack, upon an up-cast to be hit away! I had a
hundred pound ont: and then a whoreson jackanapes
must take me up for swearing; as if I borrowed mine
oaths of him and might not spend them at my pleasure.
What got he by that? You have broke his pate with
your bowl.
[Aside]  If his wit had been like him that broke it,
it would have run all out.
When a gentleman is disposed to swear, it is not for
any standers-by to curtail his oaths, ha?
No my lord;
Aside
nor crop the ears of them.
Whoreson dog! I give him satisfaction?
Would he had been one of my rank!
[Aside]  To have smelt like a fool.
I am not vexed more at any thing in the earth: a
pox ont! I had rather not be so noble as I am;
they dare not fight with me, because of the queen my
mother: every Jack-slave hath his bellyful of
fighting, and I must go up and down like a cock that
nobody can match.
[Aside]  You are cock and capon too; and you crow,
cock, with your comb on.
Sayest thou?
It is not fit your lordship should undertake every
companion that you give offence to.
No, I know that: but it is fit I should commit
offence to my inferiors.
Ay, it is fit for your lordship only.
Why, so I say.
Did you hear of a stranger thats come to court to-night?
A stranger, and I not know ont!
[Aside]  Hes a strange fellow himself, and knows it
not.
Theres an Italian come; and, tis thought, one of
Leonatus friends.
Leonatus! a banished rascal; and hes another,
whatsoever he be. Who told you of this stranger?
One of your lordships pages.
Is it fit I went to look upon him? is there no
derogation int?
You cannot derogate, my lord.
Not easily, I think.
[Aside]  You are a fool granted; therefore your
issues, being foolish, do not derogate.
Come, Ill go see this Italian: what I have lost
to-day at bowls Ill win to-night of him. Come, go.
Ill attend your lordship.
Exeunt CLOTEN and First Lord
That such a crafty devil as is his mother
Should yield the world this ass! a woman that
Bears all down with her brain; and this her son
Cannot take two from twenty, for his heart,
And leave eighteen. Alas, poor princess,
Thou divine Imogen, what thou endurest,
Betwixt a father by thy step-dame governd,
A mother hourly coining plots, a wooer
More hateful than the foul expulsion is
Of thy dear husband, than that horrid act
Of the divorce held make! The heavens hold firm
The walls of thy dear honour, keep unshaked
That temple, thy fair mind, that thou mayst stand,
To enjoy thy banishd lord and this great land!
Exit
SCENE II. Imogens bedchamber in Cymbelines palace:
a trunk in one corner of it.
IMOGEN in bed, reading; a Lady attending
Whos there? my woman Helen?
Please you, madam
What hour is it?
Almost midnight, madam.
I have read three hours then: mine eyes are weak:
Fold down the leaf where I have left: to bed:
Take not away the taper, leave it burning;
And if thou canst awake by four o the clock,
I prithee, call me. Sleep hath seized me wholly
Exit Lady
To your protection I commend me, gods.
From fairies and the tempters of the night
Guard me, beseech ye.
Sleeps. IACHIMO comes from the trunk
The crickets sing, and mans oer-labourd sense
Repairs itself by rest. Our Tarquin thus
Did softly press the rushes, ere he wakend
The chastity he wounded. Cytherea,
How bravely thou becomest thy bed, fresh lily,
And whiter than the sheets! That I might touch!
But kiss; one kiss! Rubies unparagond,
How dearly they dot! Tis her breathing that
Perfumes the chamber thus: the flame o the taper
Bows toward her, and would under-peep her lids,
To see the enclosed lights, now canopied
Under these windows, white and azure laced
With blue of heavens own tinct. But my design,
To note the chamber: I will write all down:
Such and such pictures; there the window; such
The adornment of her bed; the arras; figures,
Why, such and such; and the contents o the story.
Ah, but some natural notes about her body,
Above ten thousand meaner moveables
Would testify, to enrich mine inventory.
O sleep, thou ape of death, lie dull upon her!
And be her sense but as a monument,
Thus in a chapel lying! Come off, come off:
Taking off her bracelet
As slippery as the Gordian knot was hard!
Tis mine; and this will witness outwardly,
As strongly as the conscience does within,
To the madding of her lord. On her left breast
A mole cinque-spotted, like the crimson drops
I the bottom of a cowslip: heres a voucher,
Stronger than ever law could make: this secret
Will force him think I have pickd the lock and taen
The treasure of her honour. No more. To what end?
Why should I write this down, thats riveted,
Screwd to my memory? She hath been reading late
The tale of Tereus; here the leafs turnd down
Where Philomel gave up. I have enough:
To the trunk again, and shut the spring of it.
Swift, swift, you dragons of the night, that dawning
May bare the ravens eye! I lodge in fear;
Though this a heavenly angel, hell is here.
Clock strikes
One, two, three: time, time!
Goes into the trunk. The scene closes
An ante-chamber adjoining Imogens apartments.
Enter CLOTEN and Lords
Your lordship is the most patient man in loss, the
most coldest that ever turned up ace.
It would make any man cold to lose.
But not every man patient after the noble temper of
your lordship. You are most hot and furious when you win.
Winning will put any man into courage. If I could
get this foolish Imogen, I should have gold enough.
Its almost morning, ist not?
Day, my lord.
I would this music would come: I am advised to give
her music o mornings; they say it will penetrate.
Enter Musicians
Come on; tune: if you can penetrate her with your
fingering, so; well try with tongue too: if none
will do, let her remain; but Ill never give oer.
First, a very excellent good-conceited thing;
after, a wonderful sweet air, with admirable rich
words to it: and then let her consider.
SONG
Hark, hark! the lark at heavens gate sings,
And Phoebus gins arise,
His steeds to water at those springs
On chaliced flowers that lies;
And winking Mary-buds begin
To ope their golden eyes:
With every thing that pretty is,
My lady sweet, arise:
Arise, arise.
So, get you gone. If this penetrate, I will
consider your music the better: if it do not, it is
a vice in her ears, which horse-hairs and
calves-guts, nor the voice of unpaved eunuch to
boot, can never amend.
Exeunt Musicians
Here comes the king.
I am glad I was up so late; for thats the reason I
was up so early: he cannot choose but take this
service I have done fatherly.
Enter CYMBELINE and QUEEN
Good morrow to your majesty and to my gracious mother.
Attend you here the door of our stern daughter?
Will she not forth?
I have assailed her with music, but she vouchsafes no notice.
The exile of her minion is too new;
She hath not yet forgot him: some more time
Must wear the print of his remembrance out,
And then shes yours.
You are most bound to the king,
Who lets go by no vantages that may
Prefer you to his daughter. Frame yourself
To orderly soliciting, and be friended
With aptness of the season; make denials
Increase your services; so seem as if
You were inspired to do those duties which
You tender to her; that you in all obey her,
Save when command to your dismission tends,
And therein you are senseless.
Senseless! not so.
Enter a Messenger
So like you, sir, ambassadors from Rome;
The one is Caius Lucius.
A worthy fellow,
Albeit he comes on angry purpose now;
But thats no fault of his: we must receive him
According to the honour of his sender;
And towards himself, his goodness forespent on us,
We must extend our notice. Our dear son,
When you have given good morning to your mistress,
Attend the queen and us; we shall have need
To employ you towards this Roman. Come, our queen.
Exeunt all but CLOTEN
If she be up, Ill speak with her; if not,
Let her lie still and dream.
Knocks
By your leave, ho!
I Know her women are about her: what
If I do line one of their hands? Tis gold
Which buys admittance; oft it doth; yea, and makes
Dianas rangers false themselves, yield up
Their deer to the stand o the stealer; and tis gold
Which makes the true man killd and saves the thief;
Nay, sometime hangs both thief and true man: what
Can it not do and undo? I will make
One of her women lawyer to me, for
I yet not understand the case myself.
Knocks
By your leave.
Enter a Lady
Whos there that knocks?
A gentleman.
No more?
Yes, and a gentlewomans son.
Thats more
Than some, whose tailors are as dear as yours,
Can justly boast of. Whats your lordships pleasure?
Your ladys person: is she ready?
Ay,
To keep her chamber.
There is gold for you;
Sell me your good report.
How! my good name? or to report of you
What I shall think is good?--The princess!
Enter IMOGEN
Good morrow, fairest: sister, your sweet hand.
Exit Lady
Good morrow, sir. You lay out too much pains
For purchasing but trouble; the thanks I give
Is telling you that I am poor of thanks
And scarce can spare them.
Still, I swear I love you.
If you but said so, twere as deep with me:
If you swear still, your recompense is still
That I regard it not.
This is no answer.
But that you shall not say I yield being silent,
I would not speak. I pray you, spare me: faith,
I shall unfold equal discourtesy
To your best kindness: one of your great knowing
Should learn, being taught, forbearance.
To leave you in your madness, twere my sin:
I will not.
Fools are not mad folks.
Do you call me fool?
As I am mad, I do:
If youll be patient, Ill no more be mad;
That cures us both. I am much sorry, sir,
You put me to forget a ladys manners,
By being so verbal: and learn now, for all,
That I, which know my heart, do here pronounce,
By the very truth of it, I care not for you,
And am so near the lack of charity--
To accuse myself--I hate you; which I had rather
You felt than maket my boast.
You sin against
Obedience, which you owe your father. For
The contract you pretend with that base wretch,
One bred of alms and fosterd with cold dishes,
With scraps o the court, it is no contract, none:
And though it be allowd in meaner parties--
Yet who than he more mean?--to knit their souls,
On whom there is no more dependency
But brats and beggary, in self-figured knot;
Yet you are curbd from that enlargement by
The consequence o the crown, and must not soil
The precious note of it with a base slave.
A hilding for a livery, a squires cloth,
A pantler, not so eminent.
Profane fellow
Wert thou the son of Jupiter and no more
But what thou art besides, thou wert too base
To be his groom: thou wert dignified enough,
Even to the point of envy, if twere made
Comparative for your virtues, to be styled
The under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated
For being preferred so well.
The south-fog rot him!
He never can meet more mischance than come
To be but named of thee. His meanest garment,
That ever hath but clippd his body, is dearer
In my respect than all the hairs above thee,
Were they all made such men. How now, Pisanio!
Enter PISANIO
His garment! Now the devil--
To Dorothy my woman hie thee presently--
His garment!
I am sprited with a fool.
Frighted, and angerd worse: go bid my woman
Search for a jewel that too casually
Hath left mine arm: it was thy masters: shrew me,
If I would lose it for a revenue
Of any kings in Europe. I do think
I sawt this morning: confident I am
Last night twas on mine arm; I kissd it:
I hope it be not gone to tell my lord
That I kiss aught but he.
Twill not be lost.
I hope so: go and search.
Exit PISANIO
You have abused me:
His meanest garment!
Ay, I said so, sir:
If you will maket an action, call witness tot.
I will inform your father.
Your mother too:
Shes my good lady, and will conceive, I hope,
But the worst of me. So, I leave you, sir,
To the worst of discontent.
Exit
Ill be revenged:
His meanest garment! Well.
Exit
CYMBELINE
SCENE IV. Rome. Philarios house.
Enter POSTHUMUS and PHILARIO
Fear it not, sir: I would I were so sure
To win the king as I am bold her honour
Will remain hers.
What means do you make to him?
Not any, but abide the change of time,
Quake in the present winters state and wish
That warmer days would come: in these seard hopes,
I barely gratify your love; they failing,
I must die much your debtor.
Your very goodness and your company
Oerpays all I can do. By this, your king
Hath heard of great Augustus: Caius Lucius
Will dos commission throughly: and I think
Hell grant the tribute, send the arrearages,
Or look upon our Romans, whose remembrance
Is yet fresh in their grief.
I do believe,
Statist though I am none, nor like to be,
That this will prove a war; and you shall hear
The legions now in Gallia sooner landed
In our not-fearing Britain than have tidings
Of any penny tribute paid. Our countrymen
Are men more orderd than when Julius Caesar
Smiled at their lack of skill, but found
their courage
Worthy his frowning at: their discipline,
Now mingled with their courages, will make known
To their approvers they are people such
That mend upon the world.
Enter IACHIMO
See! Iachimo!
The swiftest harts have posted you by land;
And winds of all the comers kissd your sails,
To make your vessel nimble.
Welcome, sir.
I hope the briefness of your answer made
The speediness of your return.
Your lady
Is one of the fairest that I have lookd upon.
And therewithal the best; or let her beauty
Look through a casement to allure false hearts
And be false with them.
Here are letters for you.
Their tenor good, I trust.
Tis very like.
Was Caius Lucius in the Britain court
When you were there?
He was expected then,
But not approachd.
All is well yet.
Sparkles this stone as it was wont? or ist not
Too dull for your good wearing?
If I had lost it,
I should have lost the worth of it in gold.
Ill make a journey twice as far, to enjoy
A second night of such sweet shortness which
Was mine in Britain, for the ring is won.
The stones too hard to come by.
Not a whit,
Your lady being so easy.
Make not, sir,
Your loss your sport: I hope you know that we
Must not continue friends.
Good sir, we must,
If you keep covenant. Had I not brought
The knowledge of your mistress home, I grant
We were to question further: but I now
Profess myself the winner of her honour,
Together with your ring; and not the wronger
Of her or you, having proceeded but
By both your wills.
If you can maket apparent
That you have tasted her in bed, my hand
And ring is yours; if not, the foul opinion
You had of her pure honour gains or loses
Your sword or mine, or masterless leaves both
To who shall find them.
Sir, my circumstances,
Being so near the truth as I will make them,
Must first induce you to believe: whose strength
I will confirm with oath; which, I doubt not,
Youll give me leave to spare, when you shall find
You need it not.
Proceed.
First, her bedchamber,--
Where, I confess, I slept not, but profess
Had that was well worth watching--it was hangd
With tapesty of silk and silver; the story
Proud Cleopatra, when she met her Roman,
And Cydnus swelld above the banks, or for
The press of boats or pride: a piece of work
So bravely done, so rich, that it did strive
In workmanship and value; which I wonderd
Could be so rarely and exactly wrought,
Since the true life ont was--
This is true;
And this you might have heard of here, by me,
Or by some other.
More particulars
Must justify my knowledge.
So they must,
Or do your honour injury.
The chimney
Is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece
Chaste Dian bathing: never saw I figures
So likely to report themselves: the cutter
Was as another nature, dumb; outwent her,
Motion and breath left out.
This is a thing
Which you might from relation likewise reap,
Being, as it is, much spoke of.
The roof o the chamber
With golden cherubins is fretted: her andirons--
I had forgot them--were two winking Cupids
Of silver, each on one foot standing, nicely
Depending on their brands.
This is her honour!
Let it be granted you have seen all this--and praise
Be given to your remembrance--the description
Of what is in her chamber nothing saves
The wager you have laid.
Then, if you can,
Showing the bracelet
Be pale: I beg but leave to air this jewel; see!
And now tis up again: it must be married
To that your diamond; Ill keep them.
Jove!
Once more let me behold it: is it that
Which I left with her?
Sir--I thank her--that:
She strippd it from her arm; I see her yet;
Her pretty action did outsell her gift,
And yet enrichd it too: she gave it me, and said
She prized it once.
May be she pluckd it off
To send it me.
She writes so to you, doth she?
O, no, no, no! tis true. Here, take this too;
Gives the ring
It is a basilisk unto mine eye,
Kills me to look ont. Let there be no honour
Where there is beauty; truth, where semblance; love,
Where theres another man: the vows of women
Of no more bondage be, to where they are made,
Than they are to their virtues; which is nothing.
O, above measure false!
Have patience, sir,
And take your ring again; tis not yet won:
It may be probable she lost it; or
Who knows if one of her women, being corrupted,
Hath stoln it from her?
Very true;
And so, I hope, he came byt. Back my ring:
Render to me some corporal sign about her,
More evident than this; for this was stolen.
By Jupiter, I had it from her arm.
Hark you, he swears; by Jupiter he swears.
Tis true:--nay, keep the ring--tis true: I am sure
She would not lose it: her attendants are
All sworn and honourable:--they induced to steal it!
And by a stranger!--No, he hath enjoyed her:
The cognizance of her incontinency
Is this: she hath bought the name of whore
thus dearly.
There, take thy hire; and all the fiends of hell
Divide themselves between you!
Sir, be patient:
This is not strong enough to be believed
Of one persuaded well of--
Never talk ont;
She hath been colted by him.
If you seek
For further satisfying, under her breast--
Worthy the pressing--lies a mole, right proud
Of that most delicate lodging: by my life,
I kissd it; and it gave me present hunger
To feed again, though full. You do remember
This stain upon her?
Ay, and it doth confirm
Another stain, as big as hell can hold,
Were there no more but it.
Will you hear more?
Spare your arithmetic: never count the turns;
Once, and a million!
Ill be sworn--
No swearing.
If you will swear you have not donet, you lie;
And I will kill thee, if thou dost deny
Thoust made me cuckold.
Ill deny nothing.
O, that I had her here, to tear her limb-meal!
I will go there and dot, i the court, before
Her father. Ill do something--
Exit
Quite besides
The government of patience! You have won:
Lets follow him, and pervert the present wrath
He hath against himself.
With an my heart.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Another room in Philarios house.
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS
Is there no way for men to be but women
Must be half-workers? We are all bastards;
And that most venerable man which I
Did call my father, was I know not where
When I was stampd; some coiner with his tools
Made me a counterfeit: yet my mother seemd
The Dian of that time so doth my wife
The nonpareil of this. O, vengeance, vengeance!
Me of my lawful pleasure she restraind
And prayd me oft forbearance; did it with
A pudency so rosy the sweet view ont
Might well have warmd old Saturn; that I thought her
As chaste as unsunnd snow. O, all the devils!
This yellow Iachimo, in an hour,--wast not?--
Or less,--at first?--perchance he spoke not, but,
Like a full-acornd boar, a German one,
Cried O! and mounted; found no opposition
But what he lookd for should oppose and she
Should from encounter guard. Could I find out
The womans part in me! For theres no motion
That tends to vice in man, but I affirm
It is the womans part: be it lying, note it,
The womans; flattering, hers; deceiving, hers;
Lust and rank thoughts, hers, hers; revenges, hers;
Ambitions, covetings, change of prides, disdain,
Nice longing, slanders, mutability,
All faults that may be named, nay, that hell knows,
Why, hers, in part or all; but rather, all;
For even to vice
They are not constant but are changing still
One vice, but of a minute old, for one
Not half so old as that. Ill write against them,
Detest them, curse them: yet tis greater skill
In a true hate, to pray they have their will:
The very devils cannot plague them better.
Exit
ACT III
SCENE I. Britain. A hall in Cymbelines palace.
Enter in state, CYMBELINE, QUEEN, CLOTEN,  and Lords at one door, and at another, CAIUS LUCIUS and Attendants
Now say, what would Augustus Caesar with us?
When Julius Caesar, whose remembrance yet
Lives in mens eyes and will to ears and tongues
Be theme and hearing ever, was in this Britain
And conquerd it, Cassibelan, thine uncle,--
Famous in Caesars praises, no whit less
Than in his feats deserving it--for him
And his succession granted Rome a tribute,
Yearly three thousand pounds, which by thee lately
Is left untenderd.
And, to kill the marvel,
Shall be so ever.
There be many Caesars,
Ere such another Julius. Britain is
A world by itself; and we will nothing pay
For wearing our own noses.
That opportunity
Which then they had to take from s, to resume
We have again. Remember, sir, my liege,
The kings your ancestors, together with
The natural bravery of your isle, which stands
As Neptunes park, ribbed and paled in
With rocks unscalable and roaring waters,
With sands that will not bear your enemies boats,
But suck them up to the topmast. A kind of conquest
Caesar made here; but made not here his brag
Of Came and saw and overcame:  with shame--
That first that ever touchd him--he was carried
From off our coast, twice beaten; and his shipping--
Poor ignorant baubles!-- upon our terrible seas,
Like egg-shells moved upon their surges, crackd
As easily gainst our rocks: for joy whereof
The famed Cassibelan, who was once at point--
O giglot fortune!--to master Caesars sword,
Made Luds town with rejoicing fires bright
And Britons strut with courage.
Come, theres no more tribute to be paid: our
kingdom is stronger than it was at that time; and,
as I said, there is no moe such Caesars: other of
them may have crookd noses, but to owe such
straight arms, none.
Son, let your mother end.
We have yet many among us can gripe as hard as
Cassibelan: I do not say I am one; but I have a
hand. Why tribute? why should we pay tribute? If
Caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket, or
put the moon in his pocket, we will pay him tribute
for light; else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.
You must know,
Till the injurious Romans did extort
This tribute from us, we were free:
Caesars ambition,
Which swelld so much that it did almost stretch
The sides o the world, against all colour here
Did put the yoke upon s; which to shake off
Becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon
Ourselves to be.
We do.
Say, then, to Caesar,
Our ancestor was that Mulmutius which
Ordaind our laws, whose use the sword of Caesar
Hath too much mangled; whose repair and franchise
Shall, by the power we hold, be our good deed,
Though Rome be therefore angry: Mulmutius made our laws,
Who was the first of Britain which did put
His brows within a golden crown and calld
Himself a king.
I am sorry, Cymbeline,
That I am to pronounce Augustus Caesar--
Caesar, that hath more kings his servants than
Thyself domestic officers--thine enemy:
Receive it from me, then: war and confusion
In Caesars name pronounce I gainst thee: look
For fury not to be resisted. Thus defied,
I thank thee for myself.
Thou art welcome, Caius.
Thy Caesar knighted me; my youth I spent
Much under him; of him I gatherd honour;
Which he to seek of me again, perforce,
Behoves me keep at utterance. I am perfect
That the Pannonians and Dalmatians for
Their liberties are now in arms; a precedent
Which not to read would show the Britons cold:
So Caesar shall not find them.
Let proof speak.
His majesty bids you welcome. Make
pastime with us a day or two, or longer: if
you seek us afterwards in other terms, you
shall find us in our salt-water girdle: if you
beat us out of it, it is yours; if you fall in
the adventure, our crows shall fare the better
for you; and theres an end.
So, sir.
I know your masters pleasure and he mine:
All the remain is Welcome!
Exeunt
SCENE II. Another room in the palace.
Enter PISANIO, with a letter
How? of adultery? Wherefore write you not
What monsters her accuser? Leonatus,
O master! what a strange infection
Is falln into thy ear! What false Italian,
As poisonous-tongued as handed, hath prevaild
On thy too ready hearing? Disloyal! No:
