Shes punishd for her truth, and undergoes,
More goddess-like than wife-like, such assaults
As would take in some virtue. O my master!
Thy mind to her is now as low as were
Thy fortunes. How! that I should murder her?
Upon the love and truth and vows which I
Have made to thy command? I, her? her blood?
If it be so to do good service, never
Let me be counted serviceable. How look I,
That I should seem to lack humanity
so much as this fact comes to?
Reading
Dot: the letter
that I have sent her, by her own command
Shall give thee opportunity. O damnd paper!
Black as the ink thats on thee! Senseless bauble,
Art thou a feodary for this act, and lookst
So virgin-like without? Lo, here she comes.
I am ignorant in what I am commanded.
Enter IMOGEN
How now, Pisanio!
Madam, here is a letter from my lord.
Who? thy lord? that is my lord, Leonatus!
O, learnd indeed were that astronomer
That knew the stars as I his characters;
Held lay the future open. You good gods,
Let what is here containd relish of love,
Of my lords health, of his content, yet not
That we two are asunder; let that grieve him:
Some griefs are medcinable; that is one of them,
For it doth physic love: of his content,
All but in that! Good wax, thy leave. Blest be
You bees that make these locks of counsel! Lovers
And men in dangerous bonds pray not alike:
Though forfeiters you cast in prison, yet
You clasp young Cupids tables. Good news, gods!
Reads
Justice, and your fathers wrath, should he take me
in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me, as
you, O the dearest of creatures, would even renew me
with your eyes. Take notice that I am in Cambria,
at Milford-Haven: what your own love will out of
this advise you, follow. So he wishes you all
happiness, that remains loyal to his vow, and your,
increasing in love,
LEONATUS POSTHUMUS.
O, for a horse with wings! Hearst thou, Pisanio?
He is at Milford-Haven: read, and tell me
How far tis thither. If one of mean affairs
May plod it in a week, why may not I
Glide thither in a day? Then, true Pisanio,--
Who longst, like me, to see thy lord; who longst,--
let me bate,-but not like me--yet longst,
But in a fainter kind:--O, not like me;
For mines beyond beyond--say, and speak thick;
Loves counsellor should fill the bores of hearing,
To the smothering of the sense--how far it is
To this same blessed Milford: and by the way
Tell me how Wales was made so happy as
To inherit such a haven: but first of all,
How we may steal from hence, and for the gap
That we shall make in time, from our hence-going
And our return, to excuse: but first, how get hence:
Why should excuse be born or eer begot?
Well talk of that hereafter. Prithee, speak,
How many score of miles may we well ride
Twixt hour and hour?
One score twixt sun and sun,
Madam, s enough for you:
Aside
and too much too.
Why, one that rode tos execution, man,
Could never go so slow: I have heard of
riding wagers,
Where horses have been nimbler than the sands
That run i the clocks behalf. But this is foolery:
Go bid my woman feign a sickness; say
Shell home to her father: and provide me presently
A riding-suit, no costlier than would fit
A franklins housewife.
Madam, youre best consider.
I see before me, man: nor here, nor here,
Nor what ensues, but have a fog in them,
That I cannot look through. Away, I prithee;
Do as I bid thee: theres no more to say,
Accessible is none but Milford way.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Wales: a mountainous country with a cave.
Enter, from the cave, BELARIUS; GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS following
A goodly day not to keep house, with such
Whose roofs as low as ours! Stoop, boys; this gate
Instructs you how to adore the heavens and bows you
To a mornings holy office: the gates of monarchs
Are archd so high that giants may jet through
And keep their impious turbans on, without
Good morrow to the sun. Hail, thou fair heaven!
We house i the rock, yet use thee not so hardly
As prouder livers do.
Hail, heaven!
Hail, heaven!
Now for our mountain sport: up to yond hill;
Your legs are young; Ill tread these flats. Consider,
When you above perceive me like a crow,
That it is place which lessens and sets off;
And you may then revolve what tales I have told you
Of courts, of princes, of the tricks in war:
This service is not service, so being done,
But being so allowd: to apprehend thus,
Draws us a profit from all things we see;
And often, to our comfort, shall we find
The sharded beetle in a safer hold
Than is the full-wingd eagle. O, this life
Is nobler than attending for a cheque,
Richer than doing nothing for a bauble,
Prouder than rustling in unpaid-for silk:
Such gain the cap of him that makes em fine,
Yet keeps his book uncrossd: no life to ours.
Out of your proof you speak: we, poor unfledged,
Have never wingd from view o the nest, nor know not
What airs from home. Haply this life is best,
If quiet life be best; sweeter to you
That have a sharper known; well corresponding
With your stiff age: but unto us it is
A cell of ignorance; travelling a-bed;
A prison for a debtor, that not dares
To stride a limit.
What should we speak of
When we are old as you? when we shall hear
The rain and wind beat dark December, how,
In this our pinching cave, shall we discourse
The freezing hours away? We have seen nothing;
We are beastly, subtle as the fox for prey,
Like warlike as the wolf for what we eat;
Our valour is to chase what flies; our cage
We make a quire, as doth the prisond bird,
And sing our bondage freely.
How you speak!
Did you but know the citys usuries
And felt them knowingly; the art o the court
As hard to leave as keep; whose top to climb
Is certain falling, or so slippery that
The fears as bad as falling; the toil o the war,
A pain that only seems to seek out danger
I the name of fame and honour; which dies i
the search,
And hath as oft a slanderous epitaph
As record of fair act; nay, many times,
Doth ill deserve by doing well; whats worse,
Must courtsy at the censure:--O boys, this story
The world may read in me: my bodys markd
With Roman swords, and my report was once
First with the best of note: Cymbeline loved me,
And when a soldier was the theme, my name
Was not far off: then was I as a tree
Whose boughs did bend with fruit: but in one night,
A storm or robbery, call it what you will,
Shook down my mellow hangings, nay, my leaves,
And left me bare to weather.
Uncertain favour!
My fault being nothing--as I have told you oft--
But that two villains, whose false oaths prevaild
Before my perfect honour, swore to Cymbeline
I was confederate with the Romans: so
Followd my banishment, and this twenty years
This rock and these demesnes have been my world;
Where I have lived at honest freedom, paid
More pious debts to heaven than in all
The fore-end of my time. But up to the mountains!
This is not hunters language: he that strikes
The venison first shall be the lord o the feast;
To him the other two shall minister;
And we will fear no poison, which attends
In place of greater state. Ill meet you in the valleys.
Exeunt GUIDERIUS and ARVIRAGUS
How hard it is to hide the sparks of nature!
These boys know little they are sons to the king;
Nor Cymbeline dreams that they are alive.
They think they are mine; and though traind
up thus meanly
I the cave wherein they bow, their thoughts do hit
The roofs of palaces, and nature prompts them
In simple and low things to prince it much
Beyond the trick of others. This Polydore,
The heir of Cymbeline and Britain, who
The king his father calld Guiderius,--Jove!
When on my three-foot stool I sit and tell
The warlike feats I have done, his spirits fly out
Into my story: say Thus, mine enemy fell,
And thus I set my foot on s neck; even then
The princely blood flows in his cheek, he sweats,
Strains his young nerves and puts himself in posture
That acts my words. The younger brother, Cadwal,
Once Arviragus, in as like a figure,
Strikes life into my speech and shows much more
His own conceiving.--Hark, the game is roused!
O Cymbeline! heaven and my conscience knows
Thou didst unjustly banish me: whereon,
At three and two years old, I stole these babes;
Thinking to bar thee of succession, as
Thou reftst me of my lands. Euriphile,
Thou wast their nurse; they took thee for
their mother,
And every day do honour to her grave:
Myself, Belarius, that am Morgan calld,
They take for natural father. The game is up.
Exit
SCENE IV. Country near Milford-Haven.
Enter PISANIO and IMOGEN
Thou toldst me, when we came from horse, the place
Was near at hand: neer longd my mother so
To see me first, as I have now. Pisanio! man!
Where is Posthumus? What is in thy mind,
That makes thee stare thus? Wherefore breaks that sigh
From the inward of thee? One, but painted thus,
Would be interpreted a thing perplexd
Beyond self-explication: put thyself
Into a havior of less fear, ere wildness
Vanquish my staider senses. Whats the matter?
Why tenderst thou that paper to me, with
A look untender? Ift be summer news,
Smile tot before; if winterly, thou needst
But keep that countenance still. My husbands hand!
That drug-damnd Italy hath out-craftied him,
And hes at some hard point. Speak, man: thy tongue
May take off some extremity, which to read
Would be even mortal to me.
Please you, read;
And you shall find me, wretched man, a thing
The most disdaind of fortune.
[Reads]  Thy mistress, Pisanio, hath played the
strumpet in my bed; the testimonies whereof lie
bleeding in me. I speak not out of weak surmises,
but from proof as strong as my grief and as certain
as I expect my revenge. That part thou, Pisanio,
must act for me, if thy faith be not tainted with
the breach of hers. Let thine own hands take away
her life: I shall give thee opportunity at
Milford-Haven. She hath my letter for the purpose
where, if thou fear to strike and to make me certain
it is done, thou art the pandar to her dishonour and
equally to me disloyal.
What shall I need to draw my sword? the paper
Hath cut her throat already. No, tis slander,
Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue
Outvenoms all the worms of Nile, whose breath
Rides on the posting winds and doth belie
All corners of the world: kings, queens and states,
Maids, matrons, nay, the secrets of the grave
This viperous slander enters. What cheer, madam?
False to his bed! What is it to be false?
To lie in watch there and to think on him?
To weep twixt clock and clock? if sleep
charge nature,
To break it with a fearful dream of him
And cry myself awake? thats false tos bed, is it?
Alas, good lady!
I false! Thy conscience witness: Iachimo,
Thou didst accuse him of incontinency;
Thou then lookdst like a villain; now methinks
Thy favours good enough. Some jay of Italy
Whose mother was her painting, hath betrayd him:
Poor I am stale, a garment out of fashion;
And, for I am richer than to hang by the walls,
I must be rippd:--to pieces with me!--O,
Mens vows are womens traitors! All good seeming,
By thy revolt, O husband, shall be thought
Put on for villany; not born wheret grows,
But worn a bait for ladies.
Good madam, hear me.
True honest men being heard, like false Aeneas,
Were in his time thought false, and Sinons weeping
Did scandal many a holy tear, took pity
From most true wretchedness: so thou, Posthumus,
Wilt lay the leaven on all proper men;
Goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured
From thy great fall. Come, fellow, be thou honest:
Do thou thy masters bidding: when thou seest him,
A little witness my obedience: look!
I draw the sword myself: take it, and hit
The innocent mansion of my love, my heart;
Fear not; tis empty of all things but grief;
Thy master is not there, who was indeed
The riches of it: do his bidding; strike
Thou mayst be valiant in a better cause;
But now thou seemst a coward.
Hence, vile instrument!
Thou shalt not damn my hand.
Why, I must die;
And if I do not by thy hand, thou art
No servant of thy masters. Against self-slaughter
There is a prohibition so divine
That cravens my weak hand. Come, heres my heart.
Somethings aforet. Soft, soft! well no defence;
Obedient as the scabbard. What is here?
The scriptures of the loyal Leonatus,
All turnd to heresy? Away, away,
Corrupters of my faith! you shall no more
Be stomachers to my heart. Thus may poor fools
Believe false teachers: though those that
are betrayd
Do feel the treason sharply, yet the traitor
Stands in worse case of woe.
And thou, Posthumus, thou that didst set up
My disobedience gainst the king my father
And make me put into contempt the suits
Of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find
It is no act of common passage, but
A strain of rareness: and I grieve myself
To think, when thou shalt be disedged by her
That now thou tirest on, how thy memory
Will then be pangd by me. Prithee, dispatch:
The lamb entreats the butcher: wheres thy knife?
Thou art too slow to do thy masters bidding,
When I desire it too.
O gracious lady,
Since I received command to do this business
I have not slept one wink.
Dot, and to bed then.
Ill wake mine eye-balls blind first.
Wherefore then
Didst undertake it? Why hast thou abused
So many miles with a pretence? this place?
Mine action and thine own? our horses labour?
The time inviting thee? the perturbd court,
For my being absent? whereunto I never
Purpose return. Why hast thou gone so far,
To be unbent when thou hast taen thy stand,
The elected deer before thee?
But to win time
To lose so bad employment; in the which
I have considerd of a course. Good lady,
Hear me with patience.
Talk thy tongue weary; speak
I have heard I am a strumpet; and mine ear
Therein false struck, can take no greater wound,
Nor tent to bottom that. But speak.
Then, madam,
I thought you would not back again.
Most like;
Bringing me here to kill me.
Not so, neither:
But if I were as wise as honest, then
My purpose would prove well. It cannot be
But that my master is abused:
Some villain, ay, and singular in his art.
Hath done you both this cursed injury.
Some Roman courtezan.
No, on my life.
Ill give but notice you are dead and send him
Some bloody sign of it; for tis commanded
I should do so: you shall be missd at court,
And that will well confirm it.
Why good fellow,
What shall I do the where? where bide? how live?
Or in my life what comfort, when I am
Dead to my husband?
If youll back to the court--
No court, no father; nor no more ado
With that harsh, noble, simple nothing,
That Cloten, whose love-suit hath been to me
As fearful as a siege.
If not at court,
Then not in Britain must you bide.
Where then
Hath Britain all the sun that shines? Day, night,
Are they not but in Britain? I the worlds volume
Our Britain seems as of it, but not in t;
In a great pool a swans nest: prithee, think
Theres livers out of Britain.
I am most glad
You think of other place. The ambassador,
Lucius the Roman, comes to Milford-Haven
To-morrow: now, if you could wear a mind
Dark as your fortune is, and but disguise
That which, to appear itself, must not yet be
But by self-danger, you should tread a course
Pretty and full of view; yea, haply, near
The residence of Posthumus; so nigh at least
That though his actions were not visible, yet
Report should render him hourly to your ear
As truly as he moves.
O, for such means!
Though peril to my modesty, not death ont,
I would adventure.
Well, then, heres the point:
You must forget to be a woman; change
Command into obedience: fear and niceness--
The handmaids of all women, or, more truly,
Woman its pretty self--into a waggish courage:
Ready in gibes, quick-answerd, saucy and
As quarrelous as the weasel; nay, you must
Forget that rarest treasure of your cheek,
Exposing it--but, O, the harder heart!
Alack, no remedy!--to the greedy touch
Of common-kissing Titan, and forget
Your laboursome and dainty trims, wherein
You made great Juno angry.
Nay, be brief
I see into thy end, and am almost
A man already.
First, make yourself but like one.
Fore-thinking this, I have already fit--
Tis in my cloak-bag--doublet, hat, hose, all
That answer to them: would you in their serving,
And with what imitation you can borrow
From youth of such a season, fore noble Lucius
Present yourself, desire his service, tell him
wherein youre happy,--which youll make him know,
If that his head have ear in music,--doubtless
With joy he will embrace you, for hes honourable
And doubling that, most holy. Your means abroad,
You have me, rich; and I will never fail
Beginning nor supplyment.
Thou art all the comfort
The gods will diet me with. Prithee, away:
Theres more to be considerd; but well even
All that good time will give us: this attempt
I am soldier to, and will abide it with
A princes courage. Away, I prithee.
Well, madam, we must take a short farewell,
Lest, being missd, I be suspected of
Your carriage from the court. My noble mistress,
Here is a box; I had it from the queen:
Whats int is precious; if you are sick at sea,
Or stomach-qualmd at land, a dram of this
Will drive away distemper. To some shade,
And fit you to your manhood. May the gods
Direct you to the best!
Amen: I thank thee.
Exeunt, severally
SCENE V. A room in Cymbelines palace.
Enter CYMBELINE, QUEEN, CLOTEN, LUCIUS, Lords, and Attendants
Thus far; and so farewell.
Thanks, royal sir.
My emperor hath wrote, I must from hence;
And am right sorry that I must report ye
My masters enemy.
Our subjects, sir,
Will not endure his yoke; and for ourself
To show less sovereignty than they, must needs
Appear unkinglike.
So, sir: I desire of you
A conduct over-land to Milford-Haven.
Madam, all joy befal your grace!
And you!
My lords, you are appointed for that office;
The due of honour in no point omit.
So farewell, noble Lucius.
Your hand, my lord.
Receive it friendly; but from this time forth
I wear it as your enemy.
Sir, the event
Is yet to name the winner: fare you well.
Leave not the worthy Lucius, good my lords,
Till he have crossd the Severn. Happiness!
Exeunt LUCIUS and Lords
He goes hence frowning: but it honours us
That we have given him cause.
Tis all the better;
Your valiant Britons have their wishes in it.
Lucius hath wrote already to the emperor
How it goes here. It fits us therefore ripely
Our chariots and our horsemen be in readiness:
The powers that he already hath in Gallia
Will soon be drawn to head, from whence he moves
His war for Britain.
Tis not sleepy business;
But must be lookd to speedily and strongly.
Our expectation that it would be thus
Hath made us forward. But, my gentle queen,
Where is our daughter? She hath not appeard
Before the Roman, nor to us hath tenderd
The duty of the day: she looks us like
A thing more made of malice than of duty:
We have noted it. Call her before us; for
We have been too slight in sufferance.
Exit an Attendant
Royal sir,
Since the exile of Posthumus, most retired
Hath her life been; the cure whereof, my lord,
Tis time must do. Beseech your majesty,
Forbear sharp speeches to her: shes a lady
So tender of rebukes that words are strokes
And strokes death to her.
Re-enter Attendant
Where is she, sir? How
Can her contempt be answerd?
Please you, sir,
Her chambers are all lockd; and theres no answer
That will be given to the loudest noise we make.
My lord, when last I went to visit her,
She prayd me to excuse her keeping close,
Whereto constraind by her infirmity,
She should that duty leave unpaid to you,
Which daily she was bound to proffer: this
She wishd me to make known; but our great court
Made me to blame in memory.
Her doors lockd?
Not seen of late? Grant, heavens, that which I fear
Prove false!
Exit
Son, I say, follow the king.
That man of hers, Pisanio, her old servant,
have not seen these two days.
Go, look after.
Exit CLOTEN
Pisanio, thou that standst so for Posthumus!
He hath a drug of mine; I pray his absence
Proceed by swallowing that, for he believes
It is a thing most precious. But for her,
Where is she gone? Haply, despair hath seized her,
Or, wingd with fervor of her love, shes flown
To her desired Posthumus: gone she is
To death or to dishonour; and my end
Can make good use of either: she being down,
I have the placing of the British crown.
Re-enter CLOTEN
How now, my son!
Tis certain she is fled.
Go in and cheer the king: he rages; none
Dare come about him.
[Aside]            All the better: may
This night forestall him of the coming day!
Exit
I love and hate her: for shes fair and royal,
And that she hath all courtly parts more exquisite
Than lady, ladies, woman; from every one
The best she hath, and she, of all compounded,
Outsells them all; I love her therefore: but
Disdaining me and throwing favours on
The low Posthumus slanders so her judgment
That whats else rare is choked; and in that point
I will conclude to hate her, nay, indeed,
To be revenged upon her. For when fools Shall--
Enter PISANIO
Who is here? What, are you packing, sirrah?
Come hither: ah, you precious pander! Villain,
Where is thy lady? In a word; or else
Thou art straightway with the fiends.
O, good my lord!
Where is thy lady? Or, by Jupiter,--
I will not ask again. Close villain,
Ill have this secret from thy heart, or rip
Thy heart to find it. Is she with Posthumus?
From whose so many weights of baseness cannot
A dram of worth be drawn.
Alas, my lord,
How can she be with him? When was she missed?
He is in Rome.
Where is she, sir? Come nearer;
No further halting: satisfy me home
What is become of her.
O, my all-worthy lord!
All-worthy villain!
Discover where thy mistress is at once,
At the next word: no more of worthy lord!
Speak, or thy silence on the instant is
Thy condemnation and thy death.
Then, sir,
This paper is the history of my knowledge
Touching her flight.
Presenting a letter
Lets seet. I will pursue her
Even to Augustus throne.
[Aside]                 Or this, or perish.
Shes far enough; and what he learns by this
May prove his travel, not her danger.
Hum!
[Aside]  Ill write to my lord shes dead. O Imogen,
Safe mayst thou wander, safe return again!
Sirrah, is this letter true?
Sir, as I think.
It is Posthumus hand; I knowt. Sirrah, if thou
wouldst not be a villain, but do me true service,
undergo those employments wherein I should have
cause to use thee with a serious industry, that is,
what villany soeer I bid thee do, to perform it
directly and truly, I would think thee an honest
man: thou shouldst neither want my means for thy
relief nor my voice for thy preferment.
Well, my good lord.
Wilt thou serve me? for since patiently and
constantly thou hast stuck to the bare fortune of
that beggar Posthumus, thou canst not, in the
course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower of
mine: wilt thou serve me?
Sir, I will.
Give me thy hand; heres my purse. Hast any of thy
late masters garments in thy possession?
I have, my lord, at my lodging, the same suit he
wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.
The first service thou dost me, fetch that suit
hither: let it be thy lint service; go.
I shall, my lord.
Exit
Meet thee at Milford-Haven!--I forgot to ask him one
thing; Ill remembert anon:--even there, thou
villain Posthumus, will I kill thee. I would these
garments were come. She said upon a time--the
bitterness of it I now belch from my heart--that she
held the very garment of Posthumus in more respect
than my noble and natural person together with the
adornment of my qualities. With that suit upon my
back, will I ravish her: first kill him, and in her
eyes; there shall she see my valour, which will then
be a torment to her contempt. He on the ground, my
speech of insultment ended on his dead body, and
when my lust hath dined,--which, as I say, to vex
her I will execute in the clothes that she so
praised,--to the court Ill knock her back, foot
her home again. She hath despised me rejoicingly,
and Ill be merry in my revenge.
Re-enter PISANIO, with the clothes
Be those the garments?
Ay, my noble lord.
How long ist since she went to Milford-Haven?
She can scarce be there yet.
Bring this apparel to my chamber; that is the second
thing that I have commanded thee: the third is,
that thou wilt be a voluntary mute to my design. Be
but duteous, and true preferment shall tender itself
to thee. My revenge is now at Milford: would I had
wings to follow it! Come, and be true.
Exit
Thou bidst me to my loss: for true to thee
Were to prove false, which I will never be,
To him that is most true. To Milford go,
And find not her whom thou pursuest. Flow, flow,
You heavenly blessings, on her! This fools speed
Be crossd with slowness; labour be his meed!
Exit
SCENE VI. Wales. Before the cave of Belarius.
Enter IMOGEN, in boys clothes
I see a mans life is a tedious one:
I have tired myself, and for two nights together
Have made the ground my bed. I should be sick,
But that my resolution helps me. Milford,
When from the mountain-top Pisanio showd thee,
Thou wast within a ken: O Jove! I think
Foundations fly the wretched; such, I mean,
Where they should be relieved. Two beggars told me
I could not miss my way: will poor folks lie,
That have afflictions on them, knowing tis
A punishment or trial? Yes; no wonder,
When rich ones scarce tell true. To lapse in fulness
Is sorer than to lie for need, and falsehood
Is worse in kings than beggars. My dear lord!
Thou art one o the false ones. Now I think on thee,
My hungers gone; but even before, I was
At point to sink for food. But what is this?
Here is a path tot: tis some savage hold:
I were best not to call; I dare not call:
yet famine,
Ere clean it oerthrow nature, makes it valiant,
Plenty and peace breeds cowards: hardness ever
Of hardiness is mother. Ho! whos here?
If any thing thats civil, speak; if savage,
Take or lend. Ho! No answer? Then Ill enter.
Best draw my sword: and if mine enemy
But fear the sword like me, hell scarcely look ont.
Such a foe, good heavens!
Exit, to the cave
Enter BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS
You, Polydote, have proved best woodman and
Are master of the feast: Cadwal and I
Will play the cook and servant; tis our match:
The sweat of industry would dry and die,
But for the end it works to. Come; our stomachs
Will make whats homely savoury: weariness
Can snore upon the flint, when resty sloth
Finds the down pillow hard. Now peace be here,
Poor house, that keepst thyself!
I am thoroughly weary.
I am weak with toil, yet strong in appetite.
There is cold meat i the cave; well browse on that,
Whilst what we have killd be cookd.
[Looking into the cave]
Stay; come not in.
But that it eats our victuals, I should think
Here were a fairy.
Whats the matter, sir?
By Jupiter, an angel! or, if not,
An earthly paragon! Behold divineness
No elder than a boy!
Re-enter IMOGEN
Good masters, harm me not:
Before I enterd here, I calld; and thought
To have beggd or bought what I have took:
good troth,
I have stoln nought, nor would not, though I had found
Gold strewd i the floor. Heres money for my meat:
I would have left it on the board so soon
As I had made my meal, and parted
With prayers for the provider.
Money, youth?
All gold and silver rather turn to dirt!
As tis no better reckond, but of those
Who worship dirty gods.
I see youre angry:
Know, if you kill me for my fault, I should
Have died had I not made it.
Whither bound?
To Milford-Haven.
Whats your name?
Fidele, sir. I have a kinsman who
Is bound for Italy; he embarkd at Milford;
To whom being going, almost spent with hunger,
I am falln in this offence.
Prithee, fair youth,
Think us no churls, nor measure our good minds
By this rude place we live in. Well encounterd!
Tis almost night: you shall have better cheer
Ere you depart: and thanks to stay and eat it.
Boys, bid him welcome.
Were you a woman, youth,
I should woo hard but be your groom. In honesty,
I bid for you as Id buy.
Ill maket my comfort
He is a man; Ill love him as my brother:
And such a welcome as Id give to him
After long absence, such is yours: most welcome!
Be sprightly, for you fall mongst friends.
Mongst friends,
If brothers.
Aside
Would it had been so, that they
Had been my fathers sons! then had my prize
Been less, and so more equal ballasting
To thee, Posthumus.
He wrings at some distress.
Would I could freet!
Or I, whateer it be,
What pain it cost, what danger. Gods!
Hark, boys.
Whispering
Great men,
That had a court no bigger than this cave,
That did attend themselves and had the virtue
Which their own conscience seald them--laying by
That nothing-gift of differing multitudes--
Could not out-peer these twain. Pardon me, gods!
Id change my sex to be companion with them,
Since Leonatuss false.
It shall be so.
Boys, well go dress our hunt. Fair youth, come in:
Discourse is heavy, fasting; when we have suppd,
Well mannerly demand thee of thy story,
So far as thou wilt speak it.
Pray, draw near.
The night to the owl and morn to the lark
less welcome.
Thanks, sir.
I pray, draw near.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. Rome. A public place.
Enter two Senators and Tribunes
This is the tenor of the emperors writ:
That since the common men are now in action
Gainst the Pannonians and Dalmatians,
And that the legions now in Gallia are
Full weak to undertake our wars against
The falln-off Britons, that we do incite
The gentry to this business. He creates
Lucius preconsul: and to you the tribunes,
For this immediate levy, he commends
His absolute commission. Long live Caesar!
Is Lucius general of the forces?
Ay.
Remaining now in Gallia?
With those legions
Which I have spoke of, whereunto your levy
Must be supplyant: the words of your commission
Will tie you to the numbers and the time
Of their dispatch.
We will discharge our duty.
Exeunt
ACT IV
SCENE I. Wales: near the cave of Belarius.
Enter CLOTEN
I am near to the place where they should meet, if
Pisanio have mapped it truly. How fit his garments
serve me! Why should his mistress, who was made by
him that made the tailor, not be fit too? the
rather--saving reverence of the word--for tis said
a womans fitness comes by fits. Therein I must
play the workman. I dare speak it to myself--for it
is not vain-glory for a man and his glass to confer
in his own chamber--I mean, the lines of my body are
as well drawn as his; no less young, more strong,
not beneath him in fortunes, beyond him in the
advantage of the time, above him in birth, alike
conversant in general services, and more remarkable
in single oppositions: yet this imperceiverant
thing loves him in my despite. What mortality is!
Posthumus, thy head, which now is growing upon thy
shoulders, shall within this hour be off; thy
mistress enforced; thy garments cut to pieces before
thy face: and all this done, spurn her home to her
father; who may haply be a little angry for my so
rough usage; but my mother, having power of his
testiness, shall turn all into my commendations. My
horse is tied up safe: out, sword, and to a sore
purpose! Fortune, put them into my hand! This is
the very description of their meeting-place; and
the fellow dares not deceive me.
Exit
SCENE II. Before the cave of Belarius.
Enter, from the cave, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS, and IMOGEN
[To IMOGEN]  You are not well: remain here in the cave;
Well come to you after hunting.
[To IMOGEN]Brother, stay here
Are we not brothers?
So man and man should be;
But clay and clay differs in dignity,
Whose dust is both alike. I am very sick.
Go you to hunting; Ill abide with him.
So sick I am not, yet I am not well;
But not so citizen a wanton as
To seem to die ere sick: so please you, leave me;
Stick to your journal course: the breach of custom
Is breach of all. I am ill, but your being by me
Cannot amend me; society is no comfort
To one not sociable: I am not very sick,
Since I can reason of it. Pray you, trust me here:
Ill rob none but myself; and let me die,
Stealing so poorly.
I love thee; I have spoke it
How much the quantity, the weight as much,
As I do love my father.
What! how! how!
If it be sin to say so, I yoke me
In my good brothers fault: I know not why
I love this youth; and I have heard you say,
Loves reasons without reason: the bier at door,
And a demand who ist shall die, Id say
My father, not this youth.
[Aside]O noble strain!
O worthiness of nature! breed of greatness!
Cowards father cowards and base things sire base:
Nature hath meal and bran, contempt and grace.
Im not their father; yet who this should be,
Doth miracle itself, loved before me.
Tis the ninth hour o the morn.
Brother, farewell.
I wish ye sport.
You health. So please you, sir.
[Aside]  These are kind creatures. Gods, what lies
I have heard!
Our courtiers say alls savage but at court:
Experience, O, thou disprovest report!
The imperious seas breed monsters, for the dish
Poor tributary rivers as sweet fish.
I am sick still; heart-sick. Pisanio,
Ill now taste of thy drug.
Swallows some
I could not stir him:
He said he was gentle, but unfortunate;
Dishonestly afflicted, but yet honest.
Thus did he answer me: yet said, hereafter
I might know more.
To the field, to the field!
Well leave you for this time: go in and rest.
Well not be long away.
Pray, be not sick,
For you must be our housewife.
Well or ill,
I am bound to you.
And shalt be ever.
Exit IMOGEN, to the cave
This youth, hower distressd, appears he hath had
Good ancestors.
How angel-like he sings!
But his neat cookery! he cut our roots
In characters,
And sauced our broths, as Juno had been sick
And he her dieter.
Nobly he yokes
A smiling with a sigh, as if the sigh
Was that it was, for not being such a smile;
The smile mocking the sigh, that it would fly
From so divine a temple, to commix
With winds that sailors rail at.
I do note
That grief and patience, rooted in him both,
Mingle their spurs together.
Grow, patience!
And let the stinking elder, grief, untwine
His perishing root with the increasing vine!
It is great morning. Come, away!--
Whos there?
Enter CLOTEN
I cannot find those runagates; that villain
Hath mockd me. I am faint.
Those runagates!
Means he not us? I partly know him: tis
Cloten, the son o the queen. I fear some ambush.
I saw him not these many years, and yet
I know tis he. We are held as outlaws: hence!
He is but one: you and my brother search
What companies are near: pray you, away;
Let me alone with him.
Exeunt BELARIUS and ARVIRAGUS
Soft! What are you
That fly me thus? some villain mountaineers?
I have heard of such. What slave art thou?
A thing
More slavish did I neer than answering
A slave without a knock.
Thou art a robber,
A law-breaker, a villain: yield thee, thief.
To who? to thee? What art thou? Have not I
An arm as big as thine? a heart as big?
Thy words, I grant, are bigger, for I wear not
My dagger in my mouth. Say what thou art,
Why I should yield to thee?
Thou villain base,
Knowst me not by my clothes?
No, nor thy tailor, rascal,
Who is thy grandfather: he made those clothes,
Which, as it seems, make thee.
Thou precious varlet,
My tailor made them not.
Hence, then, and thank
The man that gave them thee. Thou art some fool;
I am loath to beat thee.
Thou injurious thief,
Hear but my name, and tremble.
Whats thy name?
Cloten, thou villain.
Cloten, thou double villain, be thy name,
I cannot tremble at it: were it Toad, or
Adder, Spider,
Twould move me sooner.
To thy further fear,
Nay, to thy mere confusion, thou shalt know
I am son to the queen.
I am sorry for t; not seeming
So worthy as thy birth.
Art not afeard?
Those that I reverence those I fear, the wise:
At fools I laugh, not fear them.
Die the death:
When I have slain thee with my proper hand,
Ill follow those that even now fled hence,
And on the gates of Luds-town set your heads:
Yield, rustic mountaineer.
Exeunt, fighting
Re-enter BELARIUS and ARVIRAGUS
No companies abroad?
None in the world: you did mistake him, sure.
I cannot tell: long is it since I saw him,
But time hath nothing blurrd those lines of favour
Which then he wore; the snatches in his voice,
And burst of speaking, were as his: I am absolute
Twas very Cloten.
In this place we left them:
I wish my brother make good time with him,
You say he is so fell.
Being scarce made up,
I mean, to man, he had not apprehension
Of roaring terrors; for the effect of judgment
Is oft the cause of fear. But, see, thy brother.
Re-enter GUIDERIUS, with CLOTENS head
This Cloten was a fool, an empty purse;
There was no money int: not Hercules
Could have knockd out his brains, for he had none:
Yet I not doing this, the fool had borne
My head as I do his.
What hast thou done?
I am perfect what: cut off one Clotens head,
Son to the queen, after his own report;
Who calld me traitor, mountaineer, and swore
With his own single hand held take us in
Displace our heads where--thank the gods!--they grow,
And set them on Luds-town.
We are all undone.
Why, worthy father, what have we to lose,
But that he swore to take, our lives? The law
Protects not us: then why should we be tender
To let an arrogant piece of flesh threat us,
Play judge and executioner all himself,
For we do fear the law? What company
Discover you abroad?
No single soul
Can we set eye on; but in all safe reason
He must have some attendants. Though his humour
Was nothing but mutation, ay, and that
From one bad thing to worse; not frenzy, not
Absolute madness could so far have raved
To bring him here alone; although perhaps
It may be heard at court that such as we
Cave here, hunt here, are outlaws, and in time
May make some stronger head; the which he hearing--
As it is like him--might break out, and swear
Held fetch us in; yet ist not probable
To come alone, either he so undertaking,
Or they so suffering: then on good ground we fear,
If we do fear this body hath a tail
More perilous than the head.
Let ordinance
