Come as the gods foresay it: howsoeer,
My brother hath done well.
I had no mind
To hunt this day: the boy Fideles sickness
Did make my way long forth.
With his own sword,
Which he did wave against my throat, I have taen
His head from him: Ill throwt into the creek
Behind our rock; and let it to the sea,
And tell the fishes hes the queens son, Cloten:
Thats all I reck.
Exit
I fear twill be revenged:
Would, Polydote, thou hadst not donet! though valour
Becomes thee well enough.
Would I had donet
So the revenge alone pursued me! Polydore,
I love thee brotherly, but envy much
Thou hast robbd me of this deed: I would revenges,
That possible strength might meet, would seek us through
And put us to our answer.
Well, tis done:
Well hunt no more to-day, nor seek for danger
Where theres no profit. I prithee, to our rock;
You and Fidele play the cooks: Ill stay
Till hasty Polydote return, and bring him
To dinner presently.
Poor sick Fidele!
Ill weringly to him: to gain his colour
Ild let a parish of such Clotens blood,
And praise myself for charity.
Exit
O thou goddess,
Thou divine Nature, how thyself thou blazonst
In these two princely boys! They are as gentle
As zephyrs blowing below the violet,
Not wagging his sweet head; and yet as rough,
Their royal blood enchafed, as the rudest wind,
That by the top doth take the mountain pine,
And make him stoop to the vale. Tis wonder
That an invisible instinct should frame them
To royalty unlearnd, honour untaught,
Civility not seen from other, valour
That wildly grows in them, but yields a crop
As if it had been sowd. Yet still its strange
What Clotens being here to us portends,
Or what his death will bring us.
Re-enter GUIDERIUS
Wheres my brother?
I have sent Clotens clotpoll down the stream,
In embassy to his mother: his bodys hostage
For his return.
Solemn music
My ingenious instrument!
Hark, Polydore, it sounds! But what occasion
Hath Cadwal now to give it motion? Hark!
Is he at home?
He went hence even now.
What does he mean? since death of my dearst mother
it did not speak before. All solemn things
Should answer solemn accidents. The matter?
Triumphs for nothing and lamenting toys
Is jollity for apes and grief for boys.
Is Cadwal mad?
Look, here he comes,
And brings the dire occasion in his arms
Of what we blame him for.
Re-enter ARVIRAGUS, with IMOGEN, as dead, bearing her in his arms
The bird is dead
That we have made so much on. I had rather
Have skippd from sixteen years of age to sixty,
To have turnd my leaping-time into a crutch,
Than have seen this.
O sweetest, fairest lily!
My brother wears thee not the one half so well
As when thou grewst thyself.
O melancholy!
Who ever yet could sound thy bottom? find
The ooze, to show what coast thy sluggish crare
Might easiliest harbour in? Thou blessed thing!
Jove knows what man thou mightst have made; but I,
Thou diedst, a most rare boy, of melancholy.
How found you him?
Stark, as you see:
Thus smiling, as some fly hid tickled slumber,
Not as deaths dart, being laughd at; his
right cheek
Reposing on a cushion.
Where?
O the floor;
His arms thus leagued: I thought he slept, and put
My clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness
Answerd my steps too loud.
Why, he but sleeps:
If he be gone, hell make his grave a bed;
With female fairies will his tomb be haunted,
And worms will not come to thee.
With fairest flowers
Whilst summer lasts and I live here, Fidele,
Ill sweeten thy sad grave: thou shalt not lack
The flower thats like thy face, pale primrose, nor
The azured harebell, like thy veins, no, nor
The leaf of eglantine, whom not to slander,
Out-sweetend not thy breath: the ruddock would,
With charitable bill,--O bill, sore-shaming
Those rich-left heirs that let their fathers lie
Without a monument!--bring thee all this;
Yea, and furrd moss besides, when flowers are none,
To winter-ground thy corse.
Prithee, have done;
And do not play in wench-like words with that
Which is so serious. Let us bury him,
And not protract with admiration what
Is now due debt. To the grave!
Say, where shalls lay him?
By good Euriphile, our mother.
Bet so:
And let us, Polydore, though now our voices
Have got the mannish crack, sing him to the ground,
As once our mother; use like note and words,
Save that Euriphile must be Fidele.
Cadwal,
I cannot sing: Ill weep, and word it with thee;
For notes of sorrow out of tune are worse
Than priests and fanes that lie.
Well speak it, then.
Great griefs, I see, medicine the less; for Cloten
Is quite forgot. He was a queens son, boys;
And though he came our enemy, remember
He was paid for that: though mean and
mighty, rotting
Together, have one dust, yet reverence,
That angel of the world, doth make distinction
Of place tween high and low. Our foe was princely
And though you took his life, as being our foe,
Yet bury him as a prince.
Pray You, fetch him hither.
Thersites body is as good as Ajax,
When neither are alive.
If youll go fetch him,
Well say our song the whilst. Brother, begin.
Exit BELARIUS
Nay, Cadwal, we must lay his head to the east;
My father hath a reason fort.
Tis true.
Come on then, and remove him.
So. Begin.
SONG
Fear no more the heat o the sun,
Nor the furious winters rages;
Thou thy worldly task hast done,
Home art gone, and taen thy wages:
Golden lads and girls all must,
As chimney-sweepers, come to dust.
Fear no more the frown o the great;
Thou art past the tyrants stroke;
Care no more to clothe and eat;
To thee the reed is as the oak:
The sceptre, learning, physic, must
All follow this, and come to dust.
Fear no more the lightning flash,
Nor the all-dreaded thunder-stone;
Fear not slander, censure rash;
Thou hast finishd joy and moan:
All lovers young, all lovers must
Consign to thee, and come to dust.
No exorciser harm thee!
Nor no witchcraft charm thee!
Ghost unlaid forbear thee!
Nothing ill come near thee!
Quiet consummation have;
And renowned be thy grave!
Re-enter BELARIUS, with the body of CLOTEN
We have done our obsequies: come, lay him down.
Heres a few flowers; but bout midnight, more:
The herbs that have on them cold dew o the night
Are strewings fittst for graves. Upon their faces.
You were as flowers, now witherd: even so
These herblets shall, which we upon you strew.
Come on, away: apart upon our knees.
The ground that gave them first has them again:
Their pleasures here are past, so is their pain.
Exeunt BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS
[Awaking]  Yes, sir, to Milford-Haven; which is
the way?--
I thank you.--By yond bush?--Pray, how far thither?
Ods pittikins! can it be six mile yet?--
I have gone all night. Faith, Ill lie down and sleep.
But, soft! no bedfellow!--O god s and goddesses!
Seeing the body of CLOTEN
These flowers are like the pleasures of the world;
This bloody man, the care ont. I hope I dream;
For so I thought I was a cave-keeper,
And cook to honest creatures: but tis not so;
Twas but a bolt of nothing, shot at nothing,
Which the brain makes of fumes: our very eyes
Are sometimes like our judgments, blind. Good faith,
I tremble stiff with fear: but if there be
Yet left in heaven as small a drop of pity
As a wrens eye, feard gods, a part of it!
The dreams here still: even when I wake, it is
Without me, as within me; not imagined, felt.
A headless man! The garments of Posthumus!
I know the shape ofs leg: this is his hand;
His foot Mercurial; his Martial thigh;
The brawns of Hercules: but his Jovial face
Murder in heaven?--How!--Tis gone. Pisanio,
All curses madded Hecuba gave the Greeks,
And mine to boot, be darted on thee! Thou,
Conspired with that irregulous devil, Cloten,
Hast here cut off my lord. To write and read
Be henceforth treacherous! Damnd Pisanio
Hath with his forged letters,--damnd Pisanio--
From this most bravest vessel of the world
Struck the main-top! O Posthumus! alas,
Where is thy head? wheres that? Ay me!
wheres that?
Pisanio might have killd thee at the heart,
And left this head on. How should this be? Pisanio?
Tis he and Cloten: malice and lucre in them
Have laid this woe here. O, tis pregnant, pregnant!
The drug he gave me, which he said was precious
And cordial to me, have I not found it
Murderous to the senses? That confirms it home:
This is Pisanios deed, and Clotens: O!
Give colour to my pale cheek with thy blood,
That we the horrider may seem to those
Which chance to find us: O, my lord, my lord!
Falls on the body
Enter LUCIUS, a Captain and other Officers, and a Soothsayer
To them the legions garrisond in Gailia,
After your will, have crossd the sea, attending
You here at Milford-Haven with your ships:
They are in readiness.
But what from Rome?
The senate hath stirrd up the confiners
And gentlemen of Italy, most willing spirits,
That promise noble service: and they come
Under the conduct of bold Iachimo,
Syennas brother.
When expect you them?
With the next benefit o the wind.
This forwardness
Makes our hopes fair. Command our present numbers
Be musterd; bid the captains look tot. Now, sir,
What have you dreamd of late of this wars purpose?
Last night the very gods showd me a vision--
I fast and prayd for their intelligence--thus:
I saw Joves bird, the Roman eagle, wingd
From the spongy south to this part of the west,
There vanishd in the sunbeams: which portends--
Unless my sins abuse my divination--
Success to the Roman host.
Dream often so,
And never false. Soft, ho! what trunk is here
Without his top? The ruin speaks that sometime
It was a worthy building. How! a page!
Or dead, or sleeping on him? But dead rather;
For nature doth abhor to make his bed
With the defunct, or sleep upon the dead.
Lets see the boys face.
Hes alive, my lord.
Hell then instruct us of this body. Young one,
Inform us of thy fortunes, for it seems
They crave to be demanded. Who is this
Thou makest thy bloody pillow? Or who was he
That, otherwise than noble nature did,
Hath alterd that good picture? Whats thy interest
In this sad wreck? How came it? Who is it?
What art thou?
I am nothing: or if not,
Nothing to be were better. This was my master,
A very valiant Briton and a good,
That here by mountaineers lies slain. Alas!
There is no more such masters: I may wander
From east to occident, cry out for service,
Try many, all good, serve truly, never
Find such another master.
Lack, good youth!
Thou movest no less with thy complaining than
Thy master in bleeding: say his name, good friend.
Richard du Champ.
Aside
If I do lie and do
No harm by it, though the gods hear, I hope
Theyll pardon it.--Say you, sir?
Thy name?
Fidele, sir.
Thou dost approve thyself the very same:
Thy name well fits thy faith, thy faith thy name.
Wilt take thy chance with me? I will not say
Thou shalt be so well masterd, but, be sure,
No less beloved. The Roman emperors letters,
Sent by a consul to me, should not sooner
Than thine own worth prefer thee: go with me.
Ill follow, sir. But first, ant please the gods,
Ill hide my master from the flies, as deep
As these poor pickaxes can dig; and when
With wild wood-leaves and weeds I ha strewd his grave,
And on it said a century of prayers,
Such as I can, twice oer, Ill weep and sigh;
And leaving so his service, follow you,
So please you entertain me.
Ay, good youth!
And rather father thee than master thee.
My friends,
The boy hath taught us manly duties: let us
Find out the prettiest daisied plot we can,
And make him with our pikes and partisans
A grave: come, arm him. Boy, he is preferrd
By thee to us, and he shall be interrd
As soldiers can. Be cheerful; wipe thine eyes
Some falls are means the happier to arise.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A room in Cymbelines palace.
Enter CYMBELINE, Lords, PISANIO, and Attendants
Again; and bring me word how tis with her.
Exit an Attendant
A fever with the absence of her son,
A madness, of which her lifes in danger. Heavens,
How deeply you at once do touch me! Imogen,
The great part of my comfort, gone; my queen
Upon a desperate bed, and in a time
When fearful wars point at me; her son gone,
So needful for this present: it strikes me, past
The hope of comfort. But for thee, fellow,
Who needs must know of her departure and
Dost seem so ignorant, well enforce it from thee
By a sharp torture.
Sir, my life is yours;
I humbly set it at your will; but, for my mistress,
I nothing know where she remains, why gone,
Nor when she purposes return. Beseech your highness,
Hold me your loyal servant.
Good my liege,
The day that she was missing he was here:
I dare be bound hes true and shall perform
All parts of his subjection loyally. For Cloten,
There wants no diligence in seeking him,
And will, no doubt, be found.
The time is troublesome.
To PISANIO
Well slip you for a season; but our jealousy
Does yet depend.
So please your majesty,
The Roman legions, all from Gallia drawn,
Are landed on your coast, with a supply
Of Roman gentlemen, by the senate sent.
Now for the counsel of my son and queen!
I am amazed with matter.
Good my liege,
Your preparation can affront no less
Than what you hear of: come more, for more
youre ready:
The want is but to put those powers in motion
That long to move.
I thank you. Lets withdraw;
And meet the time as it seeks us. We fear not
What can from Italy annoy us; but
We grieve at chances here. Away!
Exeunt all but PISANIO
I heard no letter from my master since
I wrote him Imogen was slain: tis strange:
Nor hear I from my mistress who did promise
To yield me often tidings: neither know I
What is betid to Cloten; but remain
Perplexd in all. The heavens still must work.
Wherein I am false I am honest; not true, to be true.
These present wars shall find I love my country,
Even to the note o the king, or Ill fall in them.
All other doubts, by time let them be cleard:
Fortune brings in some boats that are not steerd.
Exit
SCENE IV. Wales: before the cave of Belarius.
Enter BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS.
The noise is round about us.
Let us from it.
What pleasure, sir, find we in life, to lock it
From action and adventure?
Nay, what hope
Have we in hiding us? This way, the Romans
Must or for Britons slay us, or receive us
For barbarous and unnatural revolts
During their use, and slay us after.
Sons,
Well higher to the mountains; there secure us.
To the kings party theres no going: newness
Of Clotens death--we being not known, not musterd
Among the bands--may drive us to a render
Where we have lived, and so extort froms that
Which we have done, whose answer would be death
Drawn on with torture.
This is, sir, a doubt
In such a time nothing becoming you,
Nor satisfying us.
It is not likely
That when they hear the Roman horses neigh,
Behold their quarterd fires, have both their eyes
And ears so cloyd importantly as now,
That they will waste their time upon our note,
To know from whence we are.
O, I am known
Of many in the army: many years,
Though Cloten then but young, you see, not wore him
From my remembrance. And, besides, the king
Hath not deserved my service nor your loves;
Who find in my exile the want of breeding,
The certainty of this hard life; aye hopeless
To have the courtesy your cradle promised,
But to be still hot summers tamings and
The shrinking slaves of winter.
Than be so
Better to cease to be. Pray, sir, to the army:
I and my brother are not known; yourself
So out of thought, and thereto so oergrown,
Cannot be questiond.
By this sun that shines,
Ill thither: what thing is it that I never
Did see man die! scarce ever lookd on blood,
But that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison!
Never bestrid a horse, save one that had
A rider like myself, who neer wore rowel
Nor iron on his heel! I am ashamed
To look upon the holy sun, to have
The benefit of his blest beams, remaining
So long a poor unknown.
By heavens, Ill go:
If you will bless me, sir, and give me leave,
Ill take the better care, but if you will not,
The hazard therefore due fall on me by
The hands of Romans!
So say Iamen.
No reason I, since of your lives you set
So slight a valuation, should reserve
My crackd one to more care. Have with you, boys!
If in your country wars you chance to die,
That is my bed too, lads, an there Ill lie:
Lead, lead.
Aside
The time seems long; their blood
thinks scorn,
Till it fly out and show them princes born.
Exeunt
ACT V
SCENE I. Britain. The Roman camp.
Enter POSTHUMUS, with a bloody handkerchief
Yea, bloody cloth, Ill keep thee, for I wishd
Thou shouldst be colourd thus. You married ones,
If each of you should take this course, how many
Must murder wives much better than themselves
For wrying but a little! O Pisanio!
Every good servant does not all commands:
No bond but to do just ones. Gods! if you
Should have taen vengeance on my faults, I never
Had lived to put on this: so had you saved
The noble Imogen to repent, and struck
Me, wretch more worth your vengeance. But, alack,
You snatch some hence for little faults; thats love,
To have them fall no more: you some permit
To second ills with ills, each elder worse,
And make them dread it, to the doers thrift.
But Imogen is your own: do your best wills,
And make me blest to obey! I am brought hither
Among the Italian gentry, and to fight
Against my ladys kingdom: tis enough
That, Britain, I have killd thy mistress; peace!
Ill give no wound to thee. Therefore, good heavens,
Hear patiently my purpose: Ill disrobe me
Of these Italian weeds and suit myself
As does a Briton peasant: so Ill fight
Against the part I come with; so Ill die
For thee, O Imogen, even for whom my life
Is every breath a death; and thus, unknown,
Pitied nor hated, to the face of peril
Myself Ill dedicate. Let me make men know
More valour in me than my habits show.
Gods, put the strength o the Leonati in me!
To shame the guise o the world, I will begin
The fashion, less without and more within.
Exit
SCENE II. Field of battle between the British and Roman camps.
Enter, from one side, LUCIUS, IACHIMO, and  the Roman Army: from the other side, the  British Army; POSTHUMUS LEONATUS following,  like a poor soldier. They march over and go  out. Then enter again, in skirmish, IACHIMO  and POSTHUMUS LEONATUS he vanquisheth and disarmeth IACHIMO, and then leaves him
The heaviness and guilt within my bosom
Takes off my manhood: I have belied a lady,
The princess of this country, and the air ont
Revengingly enfeebles me; or could this carl,
A very drudge of natures, have subdued me
In my profession? Knighthoods and honours, borne
As I wear mine, are titles but of scorn.
If that thy gentry, Britain, go before
This lout as he exceeds our lords, the odds
Is that we scarce are men and you are gods.
Exit
The battle continues; the Britons fly; CYMBELINE is  taken: then enter, to his rescue, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS
Stand, stand! We have the advantage of the ground;
The lane is guarded: nothing routs us but
The villany of our fears.
Stand, stand, and fight!
Re-enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS, and seconds the  Britons: they rescue CYMBELINE, and exeunt. Then re-enter LUCIUS, and IACHIMO, with IMOGEN
Away, boy, from the troops, and save thyself;
For friends kill friends, and the disorders such
As war were hoodwinkd.
Tis their fresh supplies.
It is a day turnd strangely: or betimes
Lets reinforce, or fly.
Exeunt
SCENE III. Another part of the field.
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and a British Lord
Camest thou from where they made the stand?
I did.
Though you, it seems, come from the fliers.
I did.
No blame be to you, sir; for all was lost,
But that the heavens fought: the king himself
Of his wings destitute, the army broken,
And but the backs of Britons seen, all flying
Through a straight lane; the enemy full-hearted,
Lolling the tongue with slaughtering, having work
More plentiful than tools to dot, struck down
Some mortally, some slightly touchd, some falling
Merely through fear; that the straight pass was dammd
With dead men hurt behind, and cowards living
To die with lengthend shame.
Where was this lane?
Close by the battle, ditchd, and walld with turf;
Which gave advantage to an ancient soldier,
An honest one, I warrant; who deserved
So long a breeding as his white beard came to,
In doing this fors country: athwart the lane,
He, with two striplings-lads more like to run
The country base than to commit such slaughter
With faces fit for masks, or rather fairer
Than those for preservation cased, or shame--
Made good the passage; cried to those that fled,
Our Britain s harts die flying, not our men:
To darkness fleet souls that fly backwards. Stand;
Or we are Romans and will give you that
Like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save,
But to look back in frown: stand, stand.
These three,
Three thousand confident, in act as many--
For three performers are the file when all
The rest do nothing--with this word Stand, stand,
Accommodated by the place, more charming
With their own nobleness, which could have turnd
A distaff to a lance, gilded pale looks,
Part shame, part spirit renewd; that some,
turnd coward
But by example--O, a sin in war,
Damnd in the first beginners!--gan to look
The way that they did, and to grin like lions
Upon the pikes o the hunters. Then began
A stop i the chaser, a retire, anon
A rout, confusion thick; forthwith they fly
Chickens, the way which they stoopd eagles; slaves,
The strides they victors made: and now our cowards,
Like fragments in hard voyages, became
The life o the need: having found the backdoor open
Of the unguarded hearts, heavens, how they wound!
Some slain before; some dying; some their friends
Oer borne i the former wave: ten, chased by one,
Are now each one the slaughter-man of twenty:
Those that would die or ere resist are grown
The mortal bugs o the field.
This was strange chance
A narrow lane, an old man, and two boys.
Nay, do not wonder at it: you are made
Rather to wonder at the things you hear
Than to work any. Will you rhyme upont,
And vent it for a mockery? Here is one:
Two boys, an old man twice a boy, a lane,
Preserved the Britons, was the Romans bane.
Nay, be not angry, sir.
Lack, to what end?
Who dares not stand his foe, Ill be his friend;
For if hell do as he is made to do,
I know hell quickly fly my friendship too.
You have put me into rhyme.
Farewell; youre angry.
Still going?
Exit Lord
This is a lord! O noble misery,
To be i the field, and ask what news? of me!
To-day how many would have given their honours
To have saved their carcasses! took heel to dot,
And yet died too! I, in mine own woe charmd,
Could not find death where I did hear him groan,
Nor feel him where he struck: being an ugly monster,
Tis strange he hides him in fresh cups, soft beds,
Sweet words; or hath more ministers than we
That draw his knives i the war. Well, I will find him
For being now a favourer to the Briton,
No more a Briton, I have resumed again
The part I came in: fight I will no more,
But yield me to the veriest hind that shall
Once touch my shoulder. Great the slaughter is
Here made by the Roman; great the answer be
Britons must take. For me, my ransoms death;
On either side I come to spend my breath;
Which neither here Ill keep nor bear again,
But end it by some means for Imogen.
Enter two British Captains and Soldiers
Great Jupiter be praised! Lucius is taken.
Tis thought the old man and his sons were angels.
There was a fourth man, in a silly habit,
That gave the affront with them.
So tis reported:
But none of em can be found. Stand! whos there?
A Roman,
Who had not now been drooping here, if seconds
Had answerd him.
Lay hands on him; a dog!
A leg of Rome shall not return to tell
What crows have peckd them here. He brags
his service
As if he were of note: bring him to the king.
Enter CYMBELINE, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS,  PISANIO, Soldiers, Attendants, and Roman Captives.  The Captains present POSTHUMUS LEONATUS to  CYMBELINE, who delivers him over to a Gaoler: then exeunt omnes
SCENE IV. A British prison.
Enter POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and two Gaolers
You shall not now be stoln, you have locks upon you;
So graze as you find pasture.
Ay, or a stomach.
Exeunt Gaolers
Most welcome, bondage! for thou art away,
think, to liberty: yet am I better
Than one thats sick o the gout; since he had rather
Groan so in perpetuity than be cured
By the sure physician, death, who is the key
To unbar these locks. My conscience, thou art fetterd
More than my shanks and wrists: you good gods, give me
The penitent instrument to pick that bolt,
Then, free for ever! Ist enough I am sorry?
So children temporal fathers do appease;
Gods are more full of mercy. Must I repent?
I cannot do it better than in gyves,
Desired more than constraind: to satisfy,
If of my freedom tis the main part, take
No stricter render of me than my all.
I know you are more clement than vile men,
Who of their broken debtors take a third,
A sixth, a tenth, letting them thrive again
On their abatement: thats not my desire:
For Imogens dear life take mine; and though
Tis not so dear, yet tis a life; you coind it:
Tween man and man they weigh not every stamp;
Though light, take pieces for the figures sake:
You rather mine, being yours: and so, great powers,
If you will take this audit, take this life,
And cancel these cold bonds. O Imogen!
Ill speak to thee in silence.
Sleeps
Solemn music. Enter, as in an apparition,  SICILIUS LEONATUS, father to Posthumus Leonatus,  an old man, attired like a warrior; leading in  his hand an ancient matron, his wife, and mother  to Posthumus Leonatus, with music before them:  then, after other music, follow the two young  Leonati, brothers to Posthumus Leonatus, with  wounds as they died in the wars. They circle Posthumus Leonatus round, as he lies sleeping
No more, thou thunder-master, show
Thy spite on mortal flies:
With Mars fall out, with Juno chide,
That thy adulteries
Rates and revenges.
Hath my poor boy done aught but well,
Whose face I never saw?
I died whilst in the womb he stayd
Attending natures law:
Whose father then, as men report
Thou orphans father art,
Thou shouldst have been, and shielded him
From this earth-vexing smart.
Lucina lent not me her aid,
But took me in my throes;
That from me was Posthumus ript,
Came crying mongst his foes,
A thing of pity!
Great nature, like his ancestry,
Moulded the stuff so fair,
That he deserved the praise o the world,
As great Sicilius heir.
When once he was mature for man,
In Britain where was he
That could stand up his parallel;
Or fruitful object be
In eye of Imogen, that best
Could deem his dignity?
With marriage wherefore was he mockd,
To be exiled, and thrown
From Leonati seat, and cast
From her his dearest one,
Sweet Imogen?
Why did you suffer Iachimo,
Slight thing of Italy,
To taint his nobler heart and brain
With needless jealosy;
And to become the geck and scorn
O th others villany?
For this from stiller seats we came,
Our parents and us twain,
That striking in our countrys cause
Fell bravely and were slain,
Our fealty and Tenantius right
With honour to maintain.
Like hardiment Posthumus hath
To Cymbeline performd:
Then, Jupiter, thou king of gods,
Why hast thou thus adjournd
The graces for his merits due,
Being all to dolours turnd?
Thy crystal window ope; look out;
No longer exercise
Upon a valiant race thy harsh
And potent injuries.
Since, Jupiter, our son is good,
Take off his miseries.
Peep through thy marble mansion; help;
Or we poor ghosts will cry
To the shining synod of the rest
Against thy deity.
Help, Jupiter; or we appeal,
And from thy justice fly.
Jupiter descends in thunder and lightning, sitting  upon an eagle: he throws a thunderbolt. The Apparitions fall on their knees
No more, you petty spirits of region low,
Offend our hearing; hush! How dare you ghosts
Accuse the thunderer, whose bolt, you know,
Sky-planted batters all rebelling coasts?
Poor shadows of Elysium, hence, and rest
Upon your never-withering banks of flowers:
Be not with mortal accidents opprest;
No care of yours it is; you know tis ours.
Whom best I love I cross; to make my gift,
The more delayd, delighted. Be content;
Your low-laid son our godhead will uplift:
His comforts thrive, his trials well are spent.
Our Jovial star reignd at his birth, and in
Our temple was he married. Rise, and fade.
He shall be lord of lady Imogen,
And happier much by his affliction made.
This tablet lay upon his breast, wherein
Our pleasure his full fortune doth confine:
and so, away: no further with your din
Express impatience, lest you stir up mine.
Mount, eagle, to my palace crystalline.
Ascends
He came in thunder; his celestial breath
Was sulphurous to smell: the holy eagle
Stoopd as to foot us: his ascension is
More sweet than our blest fields: his royal bird
Prunes the immortal wing and cloys his beak,
As when his god is pleased.
Thanks, Jupiter!
The marble pavement closes, he is enterd
His radiant root. Away! and, to be blest,
Let us with care perform his great behest.
The Apparitions vanish
[Waking]  Sleep, thou hast been a grandsire, and begot
A father to me; and thou hast created
A mother and two brothers: but, O scorn!
Gone! they went hence so soon as they were born:
And so I am awake. Poor wretches that depend
On greatness favour dream as I have done,
Wake and find nothing. But, alas, I swerve:
Many dream not to find, neither deserve,
And yet are steepd in favours: so am I,
That have this golden chance and know not why.
What fairies haunt this ground? A book? O rare one!
Be not, as is our fangled world, a garment
Nobler than that it covers: let thy effects
So follow, to be most unlike our courtiers,
As good as promise.
Reads
When as a lions whelp shall, to himself unknown,
without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of
tender air; and when from a stately cedar shall be
lopped branches, which, being dead many years,
shall after revive, be jointed to the old stock and
freshly grow; then shall Posthumus end his miseries,
Britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty.
Tis still a dream, or else such stuff as madmen
Tongue and brain not; either both or nothing;
Or senseless speaking or a speaking such
As sense cannot untie. Be what it is,
The action of my life is like it, which
Ill keep, if but for sympathy.
Re-enter First Gaoler
Come, sir, are you ready for death?
Over-roasted rather; ready long ago.
Hanging is the word, sir: if
you be ready for that, you are well cooked.
So, if I prove a good repast to the
spectators, the dish pays the shot.
A heavy reckoning for you, sir. But the comfort is,
you shall be called to no more payments, fear no
more tavern-bills; which are often the sadness of
parting, as the procuring of mirth: you come in
flint for want of meat, depart reeling with too
much drink; sorry that you have paid too much, and
sorry that you are paid too much; purse and brain
both empty; the brain the heavier for being too
light, the purse too light, being drawn of
heaviness: of this contradiction you shall now be
quit. O, the charity of a penny cord! It sums up
thousands in a trice: you have no true debitor and
creditor but it; of whats past, is, and to come,
the discharge: your neck, sir, is pen, book and
counters; so the acquittance follows.
I am merrier to die than thou art to live.
Indeed, sir, he that sleeps feels not the
tooth-ache: but a man that were to sleep your
sleep, and a hangman to help him to bed, I think he
would change places with his officer; for, look you,
sir, you know not which way you shall go.
Yes, indeed do I, fellow.
Your death has eyes in s head then; I have not seen
him so pictured: you must either be directed by
some that take upon them to know, or do take upon
yourself that which I am sure you do not know, or
jump the after inquiry on your own peril: and how
you shall speed in your journeys end, I think youll
never return to tell one.
I tell thee, fellow, there are none want eyes to
direct them the way I am going, but such as wink and
will not use them.
What an infinite mock is this, that a man should
have the best use of eyes to see the way of
blindness! I am sure hangings the way of winking.
Enter a Messenger
Knock off his manacles; bring your prisoner to the king.
Thou bringst good news; I am called to be made free.
Ill be hangd then.
Thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler; no bolts for the dead.
Exeunt POSTHUMUS LEONATUS and Messenger
Unless a man would marry a gallows and beget young
gibbets, I never saw one so prone. Yet, on my
conscience, there are verier knaves desire to live,
for all he be a Roman: and there be some of them
too that die against their wills; so should I, if I
were one. I would we were all of one mind, and one
mind good; O, there were desolation of gaolers and
gallowses! I speak against my present profit, but
my wish hath a preferment in t.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Cymbelines tent.
Enter CYMBELINE, BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, ARVIRAGUS, PISANIO, Lords, Officers, and Attendants
Stand by my side, you whom the gods have made
Preservers of my throne. Woe is my heart
That the poor soldier that so richly fought,
Whose rags shamed gilded arms, whose naked breast
Steppd before larges of proof, cannot be found:
He shall be happy that can find him, if
Our grace can make him so.
I never saw
Such noble fury in so poor a thing;
Such precious deeds in one that promises nought
But beggary and poor looks.
No tidings of him?
He hath been searchd among the dead and living,
But no trace of him.
To my grief, I am
The heir of his reward;
To BELARIUS, GUIDERIUS, and ARVIRAGUS
which I will add
To you, the liver, heart and brain of Britain,
By whom I grant she lives. Tis now the time
To ask of whence you are. Report it.
Sir,
In Cambria are we born, and gentlemen:
Further to boast were neither true nor modest,
Unless I add, we are honest.
Bow your knees.
Arise my knights o the battle: I create you
Companions to our person and will fit you
With dignities becoming your estates.
Enter CORNELIUS and Ladies
Theres business in these faces. Why so sadly
Greet you our victory? you look like Romans,
And not o the court of Britain.
Hail, great king!
To sour your happiness, I must report
The queen is dead.
Who worse than a physician
Would this report become? But I consider,
By medicine life may be prolongd, yet death
Will seize the doctor too. How ended she?
With horror, madly dying, like her life,
Which, being cruel to the world, concluded
Most cruel to herself. What she confessd
I will report, so please you: these her women
Can trip me, if I err; who with wet cheeks
Were present when she finishd.
Prithee, say.
First, she confessd she never loved you, only
Affected greatness got by you, not you:
Married your royalty, was wife to your place;
Abhorrd your person.
She alone knew this;
And, but she spoke it dying, I would not
Believe her lips in opening it. Proceed.
Your daughter, whom she bore in hand to love
With such integrity, she did confess
Was as a scorpion to her sight; whose life,
But that her flight prevented it, she had
Taen off by poison.
O most delicate fiend!
Who is t can read a woman? Is there more?
More, sir, and worse. She did confess she had
For you a mortal mineral; which, being took,
Should by the minute feed on life and lingering
By inches waste you: in which time she purposed,
By watching, weeping, tendance, kissing, to
Oercome you with her show, and in time,
When she had fitted you with her craft, to work
Her son into the adoption of the crown:
But, failing of her end by his strange absence,
Grew shameless-desperate; opend, in despite
Of heaven and men, her purposes; repented
The evils she hatchd were not effected; so
Despairing died.
Heard you all this, her women?
We did, so please your highness.
Mine eyes
Were not in fault, for she was beautiful;
Mine ears, that heard her flattery; nor my heart,
That thought her like her seeming; it had
been vicious
To have mistrusted her: yet, O my daughter!
That it was folly in me, thou mayst say,
And prove it in thy feeling. Heaven mend all!
Enter LUCIUS, IACHIMO, the Soothsayer, and other  Roman Prisoners, guarded; POSTHUMUS LEONATUS behind, and IMOGEN
Thou comest not, Caius, now for tribute that
The Britons have razed out, though with the loss
Of many a bold one; whose kinsmen have made suit
That their good souls may be appeased with slaughter
Of you their captives, which ourself have granted:
So think of your estate.
Consider, sir, the chance of war: the day
Was yours by accident; had it gone with us,
We should not, when the blood was cool,
have threatend
Our prisoners with the sword. But since the gods
Will have it thus, that nothing but our lives
May be calld ransom, let it come: sufficeth
A Roman with a Romans heart can suffer:
Augustus lives to think ont: and so much
For my peculiar care. This one thing only
I will entreat; my boy, a Briton born,
Let him be ransomd: never master had
A page so kind, so duteous, diligent,
So tender over his occasions, true,
So feat, so nurse-like: let his virtue join
With my request, which I make bold your highness
Cannot deny; he hath done no Briton harm,
Though he have served a Roman: save him, sir,
And spare no blood beside.
I have surely seen him:
His favour is familiar to me. Boy,
Thou hast lookd thyself into my grace,
And art mine own. I know not why, wherefore,
To say live, boy: neer thank thy master; live:
And ask of Cymbeline what boon thou wilt,
Fitting my bounty and thy state, Ill give it;
Yea, though thou do demand a prisoner,
The noblest taen.
I humbly thank your highness.
I do not bid thee beg my life, good lad;
And yet I know thou wilt.
No, no: alack,
Theres other work in hand: I see a thing
Bitter to me as death: your life, good master,
Must shuffle for itself.
The boy disdains me,
He leaves me, scorns me: briefly die their joys
That place them on the truth of girls and boys.
Why stands he so perplexd?
What wouldst thou, boy?
I love thee more and more: think more and more
Whats best to ask. Knowst him thou lookst on? speak,
Wilt have him live? Is he thy kin? thy friend?
He is a Roman; no more kin to me
Than I to your highness; who, being born your vassal,
Am something nearer.
Wherefore eyest him so?
Ill tell you, sir, in private, if you please
To give me hearing.
Ay, with all my heart,
And lend my best attention. Whats thy name?
Fidele, sir.
Thourt my good youth, my page;
Ill be thy master: walk with me; speak freely.
CYMBELINE and IMOGEN converse apart
Is not this boy revived from death?
One sand another
Not more resembles that sweet rosy lad
Who died, and was Fidele. What think you?
The same dead thing alive.
Peace, peace! see further; he eyes us not; forbear;
Creatures may be alike: were t he, I am sure
He would have spoke to us.
But we saw him dead.
Be silent; lets see further.
[Aside]It is my mistress:
Since she is living, let the time run on
To good or bad.
CYMBELINE and IMOGEN come forward
Come, stand thou by our side;
Make thy demand aloud.
