If a mans brains were ins heels, weret not in
danger of kibes?
Ay, boy.
Then, I prithee, be merry; thy wit shall neer go
slip-shod.
Ha, ha, ha!
Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly;
for though shes as like this as a crabs like an
apple, yet I can tell what I can tell.
Why, what canst thou tell, my boy?
She will taste as like this as a crab does to a
crab. Thou canst tell why ones nose stands i
the middle ons face?
No.
Why, to keep ones eyes of either sides nose; that
what a man cannot smell out, he may spy into.
I did her wrong--
Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
No.
Nor I neither; but I can tell why a snail has a house.
Why?
Why, to put his head in; not to give it away to his
daughters, and leave his horns without a case.
I will forget my nature. So kind a father! Be my
horses ready?
Thy asses are gone about em. The reason why the
seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.
Because they are not eight?
Yes, indeed: thou wouldst make a good fool.
To take t again perforce! Monster ingratitude!
If thou wert my fool, nuncle, Ild have thee beaten
for being old before thy time.
Hows that?
Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst
been wise.
O, let me not be mad, not mad, sweet heaven
Keep me in temper: I would not be mad!
Enter Gentleman
How now! are the horses ready?
Ready, my lord.
Come, boy.
She thats a maid now, and laughs at my departure,
Shall not be a maid long, unless things be cut shorter.
Exeunt
ACT II
SCENE I. GLOUCESTERs castle.
Enter EDMUND, and CURAN meets him
Save thee, Curan.
And you, sir. I have been with your father, and
given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan
his duchess will be here with him this night.
How comes that?
Nay, I know not. You have heard of the news abroad;
I mean the whispered ones, for they are yet but
ear-kissing arguments?
Not Ipray you, what are they?
Have you heard of no likely wars toward, twixt the
Dukes of Cornwall and Albany?
Not a word.
You may do, then, in time. Fare you well, sir.
Exit
The duke be here to-night? The better! best!
This weaves itself perforce into my business.
My father hath set guard to take my brother;
And I have one thing, of a queasy question,
Which I must act: briefness and fortune, work!
Brother, a word; descend: brother, I say!
Enter EDGAR
My father watches: O sir, fly this place;
Intelligence is given where you are hid;
You have now the good advantage of the night:
Have you not spoken gainst the Duke of Cornwall?
Hes coming hither: now, i the night, i the haste,
And Regan with him: have you nothing said
Upon his party gainst the Duke of Albany?
Advise yourself.
I am sure ont, not a word.
I hear my father coming: pardon me:
In cunning I must draw my sword upon you
Draw; seem to defend yourself; now quit you well.
Yield: come before my father. Light, ho, here!
Fly, brother. Torches, torches! So, farewell.
Exit EDGAR
Some blood drawn on me would beget opinion.
Wounds his arm
Of my more fierce endeavour: I have seen drunkards
Do more than this in sport. Father, father!
Stop, stop! No help?
Enter GLOUCESTER, and Servants with torches
Now, Edmund, wheres the villain?
Here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword out,
Mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moon
To stand auspicious mistress,--
But where is he?
Look, sir, I bleed.
Where is the villain, Edmund?
Fled this way, sir. When by no means he could--
Pursue him, ho! Go after.
Exeunt some Servants
By no means what?
Persuade me to the murder of your lordship;
But that I told him, the revenging gods
Gainst parricides did all their thunders bend;
Spoke, with how manifold and strong a bond
The child was bound to the father; sir, in fine,
Seeing how loathly opposite I stood
To his unnatural purpose, in fell motion,
With his prepared sword, he charges home
My unprovided body, lanced mine arm:
But when he saw my best alarumd spirits,
Bold in the quarrels right, roused to the encounter,
Or whether gasted by the noise I made,
Full suddenly he fled.
Let him fly far:
Not in this land shall he remain uncaught;
And found--dispatch. The noble duke my master,
My worthy arch and patron, comes to-night:
By his authority I will proclaim it,
That he which finds him shall deserve our thanks,
Bringing the murderous coward to the stake;
He that conceals him, death.
When I dissuaded him from his intent,
And found him pight to do it, with curst speech
I threatend to discover him: he replied,
Thou unpossessing bastard! dost thou think,
If I would stand against thee, would the reposal
Of any trust, virtue, or worth in thee
Make thy words faithd? No: what I should deny,--
As this I would: ay, though thou didst produce
My very character,--Ild turn it all
To thy suggestion, plot, and damned practise:
And thou must make a dullard of the world,
If they not thought the profits of my death
Were very pregnant and potential spurs
To make thee seek it.
Strong and fastend villain
Would he deny his letter? I never got him.
Tucket within
Hark, the dukes trumpets! I know not why he comes.
All ports Ill bar; the villain shall not scape;
The duke must grant me that: besides, his picture
I will send far and near, that all the kingdom
May have the due note of him; and of my land,
Loyal and natural boy, Ill work the means
To make thee capable.
Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, and Attendants
How now, my noble friend! since I came hither,
Which I can call but now, I have heard strange news.
If it be true, all vengeance comes too short
Which can pursue the offender. How dost, my lord?
O, madam, my old heart is crackd, its crackd!
What, did my fathers godson seek your life?
He whom my father named? your Edgar?
O, lady, lady, shame would have it hid!
Was he not companion with the riotous knights
That tend upon my father?
I know not, madam: tis too bad, too bad.
Yes, madam, he was of that consort.
No marvel, then, though he were ill affected:
Tis they have put him on the old mans death,
To have the expense and waste of his revenues.
I have this present evening from my sister
Been well informd of them; and with such cautions,
That if they come to sojourn at my house,
Ill not be there.
Nor I, assure thee, Regan.
Edmund, I hear that you have shown your father
A child-like office.
Twas my duty, sir.
He did bewray his practise; and received
This hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
Is he pursued?
Ay, my good lord.
If he be taken, he shall never more
Be feard of doing harm: make your own purpose,
How in my strength you please. For you, Edmund,
Whose virtue and obedience doth this instant
So much commend itself, you shall be ours:
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need;
You we first seize on.
I shall serve you, sir,
Truly, however else.
For him I thank your grace.
You know not why we came to visit you,--
Thus out of season, threading dark-eyed night:
Occasions, noble Gloucester, of some poise,
Wherein we must have use of your advice:
Our father he hath writ, so hath our sister,
Of differences, which I least thought it fit
To answer from our home; the several messengers
From hence attend dispatch. Our good old friend,
Lay comforts to your bosom; and bestow
Your needful counsel to our business,
Which craves the instant use.
I serve you, madam:
Your graces are right welcome.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Before Gloucesters castle.
Enter KENT and OSWALD, severally
Good dawning to thee, friend: art of this house?
Ay.
Where may we set our horses?
I the mire.
Prithee, if thou lovest me, tell me.
I love thee not.
Why, then, I care not for thee.
If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold, I would make thee
care for me.
Why dost thou use me thus? I know thee not.
Fellow, I know thee.
What dost thou know me for?
A knave; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a
base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited,
hundred-pound, filthy, worsted-stocking knave; a
lily-livered, action-taking knave, a whoreson,
glass-gazing, super-serviceable finical rogue;
one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that wouldst be a
bawd, in way of good service, and art nothing but
the composition of a knave, beggar, coward, pandar,
and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch: one whom I
will beat into clamorous whining, if thou deniest
the least syllable of thy addition.
Why, what a monstrous fellow art thou, thus to rail
on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee!
What a brazen-faced varlet art thou, to deny thou
knowest me! Is it two days ago since I tripped up
thy heels, and beat thee before the king? Draw, you
rogue: for, though it be night, yet the moon
shines; Ill make a sop o the moonshine of you:
draw, you whoreson cullionly barber-monger, draw.
Drawing his sword
Away! I have nothing to do with thee.
Draw, you rascal: you come with letters against the
king; and take vanity the puppets part against the
royalty of her father: draw, you rogue, or Ill so
carbonado your shanks: draw, you rascal; come your ways.
Help, ho! murder! help!
Strike, you slave; stand, rogue, stand; you neat
slave, strike.
Beating him
Help, ho! murder! murder!
Enter EDMUND, with his rapier drawn, CORNWALL, REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants
How now! Whats the matter?
With you, goodman boy, an you please: come, Ill
flesh ye; come on, young master.
Weapons! arms! What s the matter here?
Keep peace, upon your lives:
He dies that strikes again. What is the matter?
The messengers from our sister and the king.
What is your difference? speak.
I am scarce in breath, my lord.
No marvel, you have so bestirred your valour. You
cowardly rascal, nature disclaims in thee: a
tailor made thee.
Thou art a strange fellow: a tailor make a man?
Ay, a tailor, sir: a stone-cutter or painter could
not have made him so ill, though he had been but two
hours at the trade.
Speak yet, how grew your quarrel?
This ancient ruffian, sir, whose life I have spared
at suit of his gray beard,--
Thou whoreson zed! thou unnecessary letter! My
lord, if you will give me leave, I will tread this
unbolted villain into mortar, and daub the wall of
a jakes with him. Spare my gray beard, you wagtail?
Peace, sirrah!
You beastly knave, know you no reverence?
Yes, sir; but anger hath a privilege.
Why art thou angry?
That such a slave as this should wear a sword,
Who wears no honesty. Such smiling rogues as these,
Like rats, oft bite the holy cords a-twain
Which are too intrinse t unloose; smooth every passion
That in the natures of their lords rebel;
Bring oil to fire, snow to their colder moods;
Renege, affirm, and turn their halcyon beaks
With every gale and vary of their masters,
Knowing nought, like dogs, but following.
A plague upon your epileptic visage!
Smile you my speeches, as I were a fool?
Goose, if I had you upon Sarum plain,
Ild drive ye cackling home to Camelot.
Why, art thou mad, old fellow?
How fell you out? say that.
No contraries hold more antipathy
Than I and such a knave.
Why dost thou call him a knave?  Whats his offence?
His countenance likes me not.
No more, perchance, does mine, nor his, nor hers.
Sir, tis my occupation to be plain:
I have seen better faces in my time
Than stands on any shoulder that I see
Before me at this instant.
This is some fellow,
Who, having been praised for bluntness, doth affect
A saucy roughness, and constrains the garb
Quite from his nature: he cannot flatter, he,
An honest mind and plain, he must speak truth!
An they will take it, so; if not, hes plain.
These kind of knaves I know, which in this plainness
Harbour more craft and more corrupter ends
Than twenty silly ducking observants
That stretch their duties nicely.
Sir, in good sooth, in sincere verity,
Under the allowance of your great aspect,
Whose influence, like the wreath of radiant fire
On flickering Phoebus front,--
What meanst by this?
To go out of my dialect, which you
discommend so much. I know, sir, I am no
flatterer: he that beguiled you in a plain
accent was a plain knave; which for my part
I will not be, though I should win your displeasure
to entreat me to t.
What was the offence you gave him?
I never gave him any:
It pleased the king his master very late
To strike at me, upon his misconstruction;
When he, conjunct and flattering his displeasure,
Trippd me behind; being down, insulted, raild,
And put upon him such a deal of man,
That worthied him, got praises of the king
For him attempting who was self-subdued;
And, in the fleshment of this dread exploit,
Drew on me here again.
None of these rogues and cowards
But Ajax is their fool.
Fetch forth the stocks!
You stubborn ancient knave, you reverend braggart,
Well teach you--
Sir, I am too old to learn:
Call not your stocks for me: I serve the king;
On whose employment I was sent to you:
You shall do small respect, show too bold malice
Against the grace and person of my master,
Stocking his messenger.
Fetch forth the stocks! As I have life and honour,
There shall he sit till noon.
Till noon! till night, my lord; and all night too.
Why, madam, if I were your fathers dog,
You should not use me so.
Sir, being his knave, I will.
This is a fellow of the self-same colour
Our sister speaks of. Come, bring away the stocks!
Stocks brought out
Let me beseech your grace not to do so:
His fault is much, and the good king his master
Will cheque him for t: your purposed low correction
Is such as basest and contemnedst wretches
For pilferings and most common trespasses
Are punishd with: the king must take it ill,
That hes so slightly valued in his messenger,
Should have him thus restraind.
Ill answer that.
My sister may receive it much more worse,
To have her gentleman abused, assaulted,
For following her affairs. Put in his legs.
KENT is put in the stocks
Come, my good lord, away.
Exeunt all but GLOUCESTER and KENT
I am sorry for thee, friend; tis the dukes pleasure,
Whose disposition, all the world well knows,
Will not be rubbd nor stoppd: Ill entreat for thee.
Pray, do not, sir: I have watched and travelld hard;
Some time I shall sleep out, the rest Ill whistle.
A good mans fortune may grow out at heels:
Give you good morrow!
The dukes to blame in this; twill be ill taken.
Exit
Good king, that must approve the common saw,
Thou out of heavens benediction comest
To the warm sun!
Approach, thou beacon to this under globe,
That by thy comfortable beams I may
Peruse this letter! Nothing almost sees miracles
But misery: I know tis from Cordelia,
Who hath most fortunately been informd
Of my obscured course; and shall find time
From this enormous state, seeking to give
Losses their remedies. All weary and oerwatchd,
Take vantage, heavy eyes, not to behold
This shameful lodging.
Fortune, good night: smile once more: turn thy wheel!
Sleeps
SCENE III. A wood.
Enter EDGAR
I heard myself proclaimd;
And by the happy hollow of a tree
Escaped the hunt. No port is free; no place,
That guard, and most unusual vigilance,
Does not attend my taking. Whiles I may scape,
I will preserve myself: and am bethought
To take the basest and most poorest shape
That ever penury, in contempt of man,
Brought near to beast: my face Ill grime with filth;
Blanket my loins: elf all my hair in knots;
And with presented nakedness out-face
The winds and persecutions of the sky.
The country gives me proof and precedent
Of Bedlam beggars, who, with roaring voices,
Strike in their numbd and mortified bare arms
Pins, wooden pricks, nails, sprigs of rosemary;
And with this horrible object, from low farms,
Poor pelting villages, sheep-cotes, and mills,
Sometime with lunatic bans, sometime with prayers,
Enforce their charity. Poor Turlygod! poor Tom!
Thats something yet: Edgar I nothing am.
Exit
SCENE IV. Before GLOUCESTERs castle. KENT in the stocks.
Enter KING LEAR, Fool, and Gentleman
Tis strange that they should so depart from home,
And not send back my messenger.
As I learnd,
The night before there was no purpose in them
Of this remove.
Hail to thee, noble master!
Ha!
Makest thou this shame thy pastime?
No, my lord.
Ha, ha! he wears cruel garters. Horses are tied
by the heads, dogs and bears by the neck, monkeys by
the loins, and men by the legs: when a mans
over-lusty at legs, then he wears wooden
nether-stocks.
Whats he that hath so much thy place mistook
To set thee here?
It is both he and she;
Your son and daughter.
No.
Yes.
No, I say.
I say, yea.
No, no, they would not.
Yes, they have.
By Jupiter, I swear, no.
By Juno, I swear, ay.
They durst not do t;
They could not, would not do t; tis worse than murder,
To do upon respect such violent outrage:
Resolve me, with all modest haste, which way
Thou mightst deserve, or they impose, this usage,
Coming from us.
My lord, when at their home
I did commend your highness letters to them,
Ere I was risen from the place that showd
My duty kneeling, came there a reeking post,
Stewd in his haste, half breathless, panting forth
From Goneril his mistress salutations;
Deliverd letters, spite of intermission,
Which presently they read: on whose contents,
They summond up their meiny, straight took horse;
Commanded me to follow, and attend
The leisure of their answer; gave me cold looks:
And meeting here the other messenger,
Whose welcome, I perceived, had poisond mine,--
Being the very fellow that of late
Displayd so saucily against your highness,--
Having more man than wit about me, drew:
He raised the house with loud and coward cries.
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth
The shame which here it suffers.
Winters not gone yet, if the wild-geese fly that way.
Fathers that wear rags
Do make their children blind;
But fathers that bear bags
Shall see their children kind.
Fortune, that arrant whore,
Neer turns the key to the poor.
But, for all this, thou shalt have as many dolours
for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year.
O, how this mother swells up toward my heart!
Hysterica passio, down, thou climbing sorrow,
Thy elements below! Where is this daughter?
With the earl, sir, here within.
Follow me not;
Stay here.
Exit
Made you no more offence but what you speak of?
None.
How chance the king comes with so small a train?
And thou hadst been set i the stocks for that
question, thou hadst well deserved it.
Why, fool?
Well set thee to school to an ant, to teach thee
theres no labouring i the winter. All that follow
their noses are led by their eyes but blind men; and
theres not a nose among twenty but can smell him
thats stinking. Let go thy hold when a great wheel
runs down a hill, lest it break thy neck with
following it: but the great one that goes up the
hill, let him draw thee after. When a wise man
gives thee better counsel, give me mine again: I
would have none but knaves follow it, since a fool gives it.
That sir which serves and seeks for gain,
And follows but for form,
Will pack when it begins to rain,
And leave thee in the storm,
But I will tarry; the fool will stay,
And let the wise man fly:
The knave turns fool that runs away;
The fool no knave, perdy.
Where learned you this, fool?
Not i the stocks, fool.
Re-enter KING LEAR with GLOUCESTER
Deny to speak with me? They are sick? they are weary?
They have travelld all the night? Mere fetches;
The images of revolt and flying off.
Fetch me a better answer.
My dear lord,
You know the fiery quality of the duke;
How unremoveable and fixd he is
In his own course.
Vengeance! plague! death! confusion!
Fiery? what quality? Why, Gloucester, Gloucester,
Ild speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife.
Well, my good lord, I have informd them so.
Informd them! Dost thou understand me, man?
Ay, my good lord.
The king would speak with Cornwall; the dear father
Would with his daughter speak, commands her service:
Are they informd of this? My breath and blood!
Fiery? the fiery duke? Tell the hot duke that--
No, but not yet: may be he is not well:
Infirmity doth still neglect all office
Whereto our health is bound; we are not ourselves
When nature, being oppressd, commands the mind
To suffer with the body: Ill forbear;
And am falln out with my more headier will,
To take the indisposed and sickly fit
For the sound man. Death on my state! wherefore
Looking on KENT
Should he sit here? This act persuades me
That this remotion of the duke and her
Is practise only. Give me my servant forth.
Go tell the duke and s wife Ild speak with them,
Now, presently: bid them come forth and hear me,
Or at their chamber-door Ill beat the drum
Till it cry sleep to death.
I would have all well betwixt you.
Exit
O me, my heart, my rising heart! but, down!
Cry to it, nuncle, as the cockney did to the eels
when she put em i the paste alive; she knapped em
o the coxcombs with a stick, and cried Down,
wantons, down! Twas her brother that, in pure
kindness to his horse, buttered his hay.
Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GLOUCESTER, and Servants
Good morrow to you both.
Hail to your grace!
KENT is set at liberty
I am glad to see your highness.
Regan, I think you are; I know what reason
I have to think so: if thou shouldst not be glad,
I would divorce me from thy mothers tomb,
Sepulchring an adultress.
To KENT
O, are you free?
Some other time for that. Beloved Regan,
Thy sisters naught: O Regan, she hath tied
Sharp-toothd unkindness, like a vulture, here:
Points to his heart
I can scarce speak to thee; thoult not believe
With how depraved a quality--O Regan!
I pray you, sir, take patience: I have hope.
You less know how to value her desert
Than she to scant her duty.
Say, how is that?
I cannot think my sister in the least
Would fail her obligation: if, sir, perchance
She have restraind the riots of your followers,
Tis on such ground, and to such wholesome end,
As clears her from all blame.
My curses on her!
O, sir, you are old.
Nature in you stands on the very verge
Of her confine: you should be ruled and led
By some discretion, that discerns your state
Better than you yourself. Therefore, I pray you,
That to our sister you do make return;
Say you have wrongd her, sir.
Ask her forgiveness?
Do you but mark how this becomes the house:
Dear daughter, I confess that I am old;
Kneeling
Age is unnecessary: on my knees I beg
That youll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.
Good sir, no more; these are unsightly tricks:
Return you to my sister.
[Rising]  Never, Regan:
She hath abated me of half my train;
Lookd black upon me; struck me with her tongue,
Most serpent-like, upon the very heart:
All the stored vengeances of heaven fall
On her ingrateful top! Strike her young bones,
You taking airs, with lameness!
Fie, sir, fie!
You nimble lightnings, dart your blinding flames
Into her scornful eyes! Infect her beauty,
You fen-suckd fogs, drawn by the powerful sun,
To fall and blast her pride!
O the blest gods! so will you wish on me,
When the rash mood is on.
No, Regan, thou shalt never have my curse:
Thy tender-hefted nature shall not give
Thee oer to harshness: her eyes are fierce; but thine
Do comfort and not burn. Tis not in thee
To grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train,
To bandy hasty words, to scant my sizes,
And in conclusion to oppose the bolt
Against my coming in: thou better knowst
The offices of nature, bond of childhood,
Effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude;
Thy half o the kingdom hast thou not forgot,
Wherein I thee endowd.
Good sir, to the purpose.
Who put my man i the stocks?
Tucket within
What trumpets that?
I knowt, my sisters: this approves her letter,
That she would soon be here.
Enter OSWALD
Is your lady come?
This is a slave, whose easy-borrowd pride
Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows.
Out, varlet, from my sight!
What means your grace?
Who stockd my servant? Regan, I have good hope
Thou didst not know ont. Who comes here? O heavens,
Enter GONERIL
If you do love old men, if your sweet sway
Allow obedience, if yourselves are old,
Make it your cause; send down, and take my part!
To GONERIL
Art not ashamed to look upon this beard?
O Regan, wilt thou take her by the hand?
Why not by the hand, sir? How have I offended?
Alls not offence that indiscretion finds
And dotage terms so.
O sides, you are too tough;
Will you yet hold? How came my man i the stocks?
I set him there, sir: but his own disorders
Deserved much less advancement.
You! did you?
I pray you, father, being weak, seem so.
If, till the expiration of your month,
You will return and sojourn with my sister,
Dismissing half your train, come then to me:
I am now from home, and out of that provision
Which shall be needful for your entertainment.
Return to her, and fifty men dismissd?
No, rather I abjure all roofs, and choose
To wage against the enmity o the air;
To be a comrade with the wolf and owl,--
Necessitys sharp pinch! Return with her?
Why, the hot-blooded France, that dowerless took
Our youngest born, I could as well be brought
To knee his throne, and, squire-like; pension beg
To keep base life afoot. Return with her?
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter
To this detested groom.
Pointing at OSWALD
At your choice, sir.
I prithee, daughter, do not make me mad:
I will not trouble thee, my child; farewell:
Well no more meet, no more see one another:
But yet thou art my flesh, my blood, my daughter;
Or rather a disease thats in my flesh,
Which I must needs call mine: thou art a boil,
A plague-sore, an embossed carbuncle,
In my corrupted blood. But Ill not chide thee;
Let shame come when it will, I do not call it:
I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot,
Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove:
Mend when thou canst; be better at thy leisure:
I can be patient; I can stay with Regan,
I and my hundred knights.
Not altogether so:
I lookd not for you yet, nor am provided
For your fit welcome. Give ear, sir, to my sister;
For those that mingle reason with your passion
Must be content to think you old, and so--
But she knows what she does.
Is this well spoken?
I dare avouch it, sir: what, fifty followers?
Is it not well? What should you need of more?
Yea, or so many, sith that both charge and danger
Speak gainst so great a number? How, in one house,
Should many people, under two commands,
Hold amity? Tis hard; almost impossible.
Why might not you, my lord, receive attendance
From those that she calls servants or from mine?
Why not, my lord? If then they chanced to slack you,
We could control them. If you will come to me,--
For now I spy a danger,--I entreat you
To bring but five and twenty: to no more
Will I give place or notice.
I gave you all--
And in good time you gave it.
Made you my guardians, my depositaries;
But kept a reservation to be followd
With such a number. What, must I come to you
With five and twenty, Regan? said you so?
And speakt again, my lord; no more with me.
Those wicked creatures yet do look well-favourd,
When others are more wicked: not being the worst
Stands in some rank of praise.
To GONERIL
Ill go with thee:
Thy fifty yet doth double five and twenty,
And thou art twice her love.
Hear me, my lord;
What need you five and twenty, ten, or five,
To follow in a house where twice so many
Have a command to tend you?
What need one?
O, reason not the need: our basest beggars
Are in the poorest thing superfluous:
Allow not nature more than nature needs,
Mans lifes as cheap as beasts: thou art a lady;
If only to go warm were gorgeous,
Why, nature needs not what thou gorgeous wearst,
Which scarcely keeps thee warm. But, for true need,--
You heavens, give me that patience, patience I need!
You see me here, you gods, a poor old man,
As full of grief as age; wretched in both!
If it be you that stir these daughters hearts
Against their father, fool me not so much
To bear it tamely; touch me with noble anger,
And let not womens weapons, water-drops,
Stain my mans cheeks! No, you unnatural hags,
I will have such revenges on you both,
That all the world shall--I will do such things,--
What they are, yet I know not: but they shall be
The terrors of the earth. You think Ill weep
No, Ill not weep:
I have full cause of weeping; but this heart
Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws,
Or ere Ill weep. O fool, I shall go mad!
Exeunt KING LEAR, GLOUCESTER, KENT, and Fool
Storm and tempest
Let us withdraw; twill be a storm.
This house is little: the old man and his people
Cannot be well bestowd.
Tis his own blame; hath put himself from rest,
And must needs taste his folly.
For his particular, Ill receive him gladly,
But not one follower.
So am I purposed.
Where is my lord of Gloucester?
Followd the old man forth: he is returnd.
Re-enter GLOUCESTER
The king is in high rage.
Whither is he going?
He calls to horse; but will I know not whither.
Tis best to give him way; he leads himself.
My lord, entreat him by no means to stay.
Alack, the night comes on, and the bleak winds
Do sorely ruffle; for many miles a bout
Theres scarce a bush.
O, sir, to wilful men,
The injuries that they themselves procure
Must be their schoolmasters. Shut up your doors:
He is attended with a desperate train;
And what they may incense him to, being apt
To have his ear abused, wisdom bids fear.
Shut up your doors, my lord; tis a wild night:
My Regan counsels well; come out o the storm.
Exeunt
ACT III
SCENE I. A heath.
Storm still. Enter KENT and a Gentleman, meeting
Whos there, besides foul weather?
One minded like the weather, most unquietly.
I know you. Wheres the king?
Contending with the fretful element:
Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea,
Or swell the curled water bove the main,
That things might change or cease; tears his white hair,
Which the impetuous blasts, with eyeless rage,
Catch in their fury, and make nothing of;
Strives in his little world of man to out-scorn
The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain.
This night, wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch,
The lion and the belly-pinched wolf
Keep their fur dry, unbonneted he runs,
And bids what will take all.
But who is with him?
None but the fool; who labours to out-jest
His heart-struck injuries.
Sir, I do know you;
And dare, upon the warrant of my note,
Commend a dear thing to you. There is division,
Although as yet the face of it be coverd
With mutual cunning, twixt Albany and Cornwall;
Who have--as who have not, that their great stars
Throned and set high?--servants, who seem no less,
Which are to France the spies and speculations
Intelligent of our state; what hath been seen,
Either in snuffs and packings of the dukes,
Or the hard rein which both of them have borne
Against the old kind king; or something deeper,
Whereof perchance these are but furnishings;
But, true it is, from France there comes a power
Into this scatterd kingdom; who already,
Wise in our negligence, have secret feet
In some of our best ports, and are at point
To show their open banner. Now to you:
If on my credit you dare build so far
To make your speed to Dover, you shall find
Some that will thank you, making just report
Of how unnatural and bemadding sorrow
The king hath cause to plain.
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding;
And, from some knowledge and assurance, offer
This office to you.
I will talk further with you.
No, do not.
For confirmation that I am much more
Than my out-wall, open this purse, and take
What it contains. If you shall see Cordelia,--
As fear not but you shall,--show her this ring;
And she will tell you who your fellow is
That yet you do not know. Fie on this storm!
I will go seek the king.
Give me your hand: have you no more to say?
Few words, but, to effect, more than all yet;
That, when we have found the king,--in which your pain
That way, Ill this,--he that first lights on him
Holla the other.
Exeunt severally
SCENE II. Another part of the heath. Storm still.
Enter KING LEAR and Fool
Blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow!
You cataracts and hurricanoes, spout
Till you have drenchd our steeples, drownd the cocks!
You sulphurous and thought-executing fires,
Vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts,
Singe my white head! And thou, all-shaking thunder,
Smite flat the thick rotundity o the world!
Crack natures moulds, an germens spill at once,
That make ingrateful man!
O nuncle, court holy-water in a dry
house is better than this rain-water out o door.
Good nuncle, in, and ask thy daughters blessing:
heres a night pities neither wise man nor fool.
Rumble thy bellyful! Spit, fire! spout, rain!
Nor rain, wind, thunder, fire, are my daughters:
I tax not you, you elements, with unkindness;
I never gave you kingdom, calld you children,
You owe me no subscription: then let fall
Your horrible pleasure: here I stand, your slave,
A poor, infirm, weak, and despised old man:
But yet I call you servile ministers,
That have with two pernicious daughters joind
Your high engenderd battles gainst a head
So old and white as this. O! O! tis foul!
He that has a house to puts head in has a good
head-piece.
The cod-piece that will house
Before the head has any,
The head and he shall louse;
So beggars marry many.
The man that makes his toe
What he his heart should make
Shall of a corn cry woe,
And turn his sleep to wake.
For there was never yet fair woman but she made
mouths in a glass.
No, I will be the pattern of all patience;
I will say nothing.
Enter KENT
Whos there?
Marry, heres grace and a cod-piece; thats a wise
man and a fool.
Alas, sir, are you here? things that love night
Love not such nights as these; the wrathful skies
Gallow the very wanderers of the dark,
And make them keep their caves: since I was man,
Such sheets of fire, such bursts of horrid thunder,
Such groans of roaring wind and rain, I never
Remember to have heard: mans nature cannot carry
The affliction nor the fear.
Let the great gods,
That keep this dreadful pother oer our heads,
Find out their enemies now. Tremble, thou wretch,
That hast within thee undivulged crimes,
Unwhippd of justice: hide thee, thou bloody hand;
Thou perjured, and thou simular man of virtue
That art incestuous: caitiff, to pieces shake,
That under covert and convenient seeming
Hast practised on mans life: close pent-up guilts,
Rive your concealing continents, and cry
These dreadful summoners grace. I am a man
More sinnd against than sinning.
Alack, bare-headed!
Gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel;
Some friendship will it lend you gainst the tempest:
Repose you there; while I to this hard house--
More harder than the stones whereof tis raised;
Which even but now, demanding after you,
Denied me to come in--return, and force
Their scanted courtesy.
My wits begin to turn.
Come on, my boy: how dost, my boy? art cold?
I am cold myself. Where is this straw, my fellow?
The art of our necessities is strange,
That can make vile things precious. Come,
your hovel.
Poor fool and knave, I have one part in my heart
Thats sorry yet for thee.
[Singing]
He that has and a little tiny wit--
With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,--
Must make content with his fortunes fit,
For the rain it raineth every day.
True, my good boy. Come, bring us to this hovel.
Exeunt KING LEAR and KENT
This is a brave night to cool a courtezan.
Ill speak a prophecy ere I go:
When priests are more in word than matter;
When brewers mar their malt with water;
When nobles are their tailors tutors;
No heretics burnd, but wenches suitors;
When every case in law is right;
No squire in debt, nor no poor knight;
When slanders do not live in tongues;
Nor cutpurses come not to throngs;
When usurers tell their gold i the field;
And bawds and whores do churches build;
Then shall the realm of Albion
Come to great confusion:
Then comes the time, who lives to seet,
That going shall be used with feet.
This prophecy Merlin shall make; for I live before his time.
Exit
SCENE III. Gloucesters castle.
Enter GLOUCESTER and EDMUND
Alack, alack, Edmund, I like not this unnatural
dealing. When I desire their leave that I might
pity him, they took from me the use of mine own
house; charged me, on pain of their perpetual
displeasure, neither to speak of him, entreat for
him, nor any way sustain him.
Most savage and unnatural!
Go to; say you nothing. Theres a division betwixt
the dukes; and a worse matter than that: I have
received a letter this night; tis dangerous to be
spoken; I have locked the letter in my closet:
these injuries the king now bears will be revenged
home; theres part of a power already footed: we
must incline to the king. I will seek him, and
privily relieve him: go you and maintain talk with
the duke, that my charity be not of him perceived:
if he ask for me. I am ill, and gone to bed.
Though I die for it, as no less is threatened me,
the king my old master must be relieved. There is
some strange thing toward, Edmund; pray you, be careful.
Exit
This courtesy, forbid thee, shall the duke
Instantly know; and of that letter too:
This seems a fair deserving, and must draw me
That which my father loses; no less than all:
The younger rises when the old doth fall.
Exit
SCENE IV. The heath. Before a hovel.
Enter KING LEAR, KENT, and Fool
Here is the place, my lord; good my lord, enter:
The tyranny of the open nights too rough
For nature to endure.
Storm still
Let me alone.
Good my lord, enter here.
Wilt break my heart?
I had rather break mine own. Good my lord, enter.
Thou thinkst tis much that this contentious storm
Invades us to the skin: so tis to thee;
But where the greater malady is fixd,
The lesser is scarce felt. Thouldst shun a bear;
But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea,
Thouldst meet the bear i the mouth. When the
minds free,
The bodys delicate: the tempest in my mind
Doth from my senses take all feeling else
Save what beats there. Filial ingratitude!
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand
For lifting food tot? But I will punish home:
No, I will weep no more. In such a night
To shut me out! Pour on; I will endure.
In such a night as this! O Regan, Goneril!
Your old kind father, whose frank heart gave all,--
O, that way madness lies; let me shun that;
No more of that.
Good my lord, enter here.
Prithee, go in thyself: seek thine own ease:
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder
On things would hurt me more. But Ill go in.
To the Fool
In, boy; go first. You houseless poverty,--
Nay, get thee in. Ill pray, and then Ill sleep.
Fool goes in
