Poor naked wretches, wheresoer you are,
That bide the pelting of this pitiless storm,
How shall your houseless heads and unfed sides,
Your loopd and windowd raggedness, defend you
From seasons such as these? O, I have taen
Too little care of this! Take physic, pomp;
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel,
That thou mayst shake the superflux to them,
And show the heavens more just.
[Within]  Fathom and half, fathom and half! Poor Tom!
The Fool runs out from the hovel
Come not in here, nuncle, heres a spirit
Help me, help me!
Give me thy hand. Whos there?
A spirit, a spirit: he says his names poor Tom.
What art thou that dost grumble there i the straw?
Come forth.
Enter EDGAR disguised as a mad man
Away! the foul fiend follows me!
Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind.
Hum! go to thy cold bed, and warm thee.
Hast thou given all to thy two daughters?
And art thou come to this?
Who gives any thing to poor Tom? whom the foul
fiend hath led through fire and through flame, and
through ford and whirlipool eer bog and quagmire;
that hath laid knives under his pillow, and halters
in his pew; set ratsbane by his porridge; made film
proud of heart, to ride on a bay trotting-horse over
four-inched bridges, to course his own shadow for a
traitor. Bless thy five wits! Toms a-cold,--O, do
de, do de, do de. Bless thee from whirlwinds,
star-blasting, and taking! Do poor Tom some
charity, whom the foul fiend vexes: there could I
have him now,--and there,--and there again, and there.
Storm still
What, have his daughters brought him to this pass?
Couldst thou save nothing? Didst thou give them all?
Nay, he reserved a blanket, else we had been all shamed.
Now, all the plagues that in the pendulous air
Hang fated oer mens faults light on thy daughters!
He hath no daughters, sir.
Death, traitor! nothing could have subdued nature
To such a lowness but his unkind daughters.
Is it the fashion, that discarded fathers
Should have thus little mercy on their flesh?
Judicious punishment! twas this flesh begot
Those pelican daughters.
Pillicock sat on Pillicock-hill:
Halloo, halloo, loo, loo!
This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen.
Take heed o the foul fiend: obey thy parents;
keep thy word justly; swear not; commit not with
mans sworn spouse; set not thy sweet heart on proud
array. Toms a-cold.
What hast thou been?
A serving-man, proud in heart and mind; that curled
my hair; wore gloves in my cap; served the lust of
my mistress heart, and did the act of darkness with
her; swore as many oaths as I spake words, and
broke them in the sweet face of heaven: one that
slept in the contriving of lust, and waked to do it:
wine loved I deeply, dice dearly: and in woman
out-paramoured the Turk: false of heart, light of
ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth,
wolf in greediness, dog in madness, lion in prey.
Let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of
silks betray thy poor heart to woman: keep thy foot
out of brothels, thy hand out of plackets, thy pen
from lenders books, and defy the foul fiend.
Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind:
Says suum, mun, ha, no, nonny.
Dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa! let him trot by.
Storm still
Why, thou wert better in thy grave than to answer
with thy uncovered body this extremity of the skies.
Is man no more than this? Consider him well. Thou
owest the worm no silk, the beast no hide, the sheep
no wool, the cat no perfume. Ha! heres three on
s are sophisticated! Thou art the thing itself:
unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor bare,
forked animal as thou art. Off, off, you lendings!
come unbutton here.
Tearing off his clothes
Prithee, nuncle, be contented; tis a naughty night
to swim in. Now a little fire in a wild field were
like an old lechers heart; a small spark, all the
rest ons body cold. Look, here comes a walking fire.
Enter GLOUCESTER, with a torch
This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet: he begins
at curfew, and walks till the first cock; he gives
the web and the pin, squints the eye, and makes the
hare-lip; mildews the white wheat, and hurts the
poor creature of earth.
S. Withold footed thrice the old;
He met the night-mare, and her nine-fold;
Bid her alight,
And her troth plight,
And, aroint thee, witch, aroint thee!
How fares your grace?
Whats he?
Whos there? What ist you seek?
What are you there? Your names?
Poor Tom; that eats the swimming frog, the toad,
the tadpole, the wall-newt and the water; that in
the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages,
eats cow-dung for sallets; swallows the old rat and
the ditch-dog; drinks the green mantle of the
standing pool; who is whipped from tithing to
tithing, and stock- punished, and imprisoned; who
hath had three suits to his back, six shirts to his
body, horse to ride, and weapon to wear;
But mice and rats, and such small deer,
Have been Toms food for seven long year.
Beware my follower. Peace, Smulkin; peace, thou fiend!
What, hath your grace no better company?
The prince of darkness is a gentleman:
Modo hes calld, and Mahu.
Our flesh and blood is grown so vile, my lord,
That it doth hate what gets it.
Poor Toms a-cold.
Go in with me: my duty cannot suffer
To obey in all your daughters hard commands:
Though their injunction be to bar my doors,
And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you,
Yet have I ventured to come seek you out,
And bring you where both fire and food is ready.
First let me talk with this philosopher.
What is the cause of thunder?
Good my lord, take his offer; go into the house.
Ill talk a word with this same learned Theban.
What is your study?
How to prevent the fiend, and to kill vermin.
Let me ask you one word in private.
Importune him once more to go, my lord;
His wits begin to unsettle.
Canst thou blame him?
Storm still
His daughters seek his death: ah, that good Kent!
He said it would be thus, poor banishd man!
Thou sayst the king grows mad; Ill tell thee, friend,
I am almost mad myself: I had a son,
Now outlawd from my blood; he sought my life,
But lately, very late: I loved him, friend;
No father his son dearer: truth to tell thee,
The grief hath crazed my wits. What a nights this!
I do beseech your grace,--
O, cry your mercy, sir.
Noble philosopher, your company.
Toms a-cold.
In, fellow, there, into the hovel: keep thee warm.
Come lets in all.
This way, my lord.
With him;
I will keep still with my philosopher.
Good my lord, soothe him; let him take the fellow.
Take him you on.
Sirrah, come on; go along with us.
Come, good Athenian.
No words, no words: hush.
Child Rowland to the dark tower came,
His word was still,--Fie, foh, and fum,
I smell the blood of a British man.
Exeunt
SCENE V. Gloucesters castle.
Enter CORNWALL and EDMUND
I will have my revenge ere I depart his house.
How, my lord, I may be censured, that nature thus
gives way to loyalty, something fears me to think
of.
I now perceive, it was not altogether your
brothers evil disposition made him seek his death;
but a provoking merit, set a-work by a reprovable
badness in himself.
How malicious is my fortune, that I must repent to
be just! This is the letter he spoke of, which
approves him an intelligent party to the advantages
of France: O heavens! that this treason were not,
or not I the detector!
o with me to the duchess.
If the matter of this paper be certain, you have
mighty business in hand.
True or false, it hath made thee earl of
Gloucester. Seek out where thy father is, that he
may be ready for our apprehension.
[Aside]  If I find him comforting the king, it will
stuff his suspicion more fully.--I will persevere in
my course of loyalty, though the conflict be sore
between that and my blood.
I will lay trust upon thee; and thou shalt find a
dearer father in my love.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. A chamber in a farmhouse adjoining the castle.
Enter GLOUCESTER, KING LEAR, KENT, Fool, and EDGAR
Here is better than the open air; take it
thankfully. I will piece out the comfort with what
addition I can: I will not be long from you.
All the power of his wits have given way to his
impatience: the gods reward your kindness!
Exit GLOUCESTER
Frateretto calls me; and tells me
Nero is an angler in the lake of darkness.
Pray, innocent, and beware the foul fiend.
Prithee, nuncle, tell me whether a madman be a
gentleman or a yeoman?
A king, a king!
No, hes a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son;
for hes a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman
before him.
To have a thousand with red burning spits
Come hissing in upon em,--
The foul fiend bites my back.
Hes mad that trusts in the tameness of a wolf, a
horses health, a boys love, or a whores oath.
It shall be done; I will arraign them straight.
To EDGAR
Come, sit thou here, most learned justicer;
To the Fool
Thou, sapient sir, sit here. Now, you she foxes!
Look, where he stands and glares!
Wantest thou eyes at trial, madam?
Come oer the bourn, Bessy, to me,--
Her boat hath a leak,
And she must not speak
Why she dares not come over to thee.
The foul fiend haunts poor Tom in the voice of a
nightingale. Hopdance cries in Toms belly for two
white herring. Croak not, black angel; I have no
food for thee.
How do you, sir? Stand you not so amazed:
Will you lie down and rest upon the cushions?
Ill see their trial first. Bring in the evidence.
To EDGAR
Thou robed man of justice, take thy place;
To the Fool
And thou, his yoke-fellow of equity,
Bench by his side:
To KENT
you are o the commission,
Sit you too.
Let us deal justly.
Sleepest or wakest thou, jolly shepherd?
Thy sheep be in the corn;
And for one blast of thy minikin mouth,
Thy sheep shall take no harm.
Pur! the cat is gray.
Arraign her first; tis Goneril. I here take my
oath before this honourable assembly, she kicked the
poor king her father.
Come hither, mistress. Is your name Goneril?
She cannot deny it.
Cry you mercy, I took you for a joint-stool.
And heres another, whose warpd looks proclaim
What store her heart is made on. Stop her there!
Arms, arms, sword, fire! Corruption in the place!
False justicer, why hast thou let her scape?
Bless thy five wits!
O pity! Sir, where is the patience now,
That thou so oft have boasted to retain?
[Aside]  My tears begin to take his part so much,
Theyll mar my counterfeiting.
The little dogs and all, Tray, Blanch, and
Sweet-heart, see, they bark at me.
Tom will throw his head at them. Avaunt, you curs!
Be thy mouth or black or white,
Tooth that poisons if it bite;
Mastiff, grey-hound, mongrel grim,
Hound or spaniel, brach or lym,
Or bobtail tike or trundle-tail,
Tom will make them weep and wail:
For, with throwing thus my head,
Dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled.
Do de, de, de. Sessa! Come, march to wakes and
fairs and market-towns. Poor Tom, thy horn is dry.
Then let them anatomize Regan; see what breeds
about her heart. Is there any cause in nature that
makes these hard hearts?
To EDGAR
You, sir, I entertain for one of my hundred; only I
do not like the fashion of your garments: you will
say they are Persian attire: but let them be changed.
Now, good my lord, lie here and rest awhile.
Make no noise, make no noise; draw the curtains:
so, so, so. Well go to supper i he morning. So, so, so.
And Ill go to bed at noon.
Re-enter GLOUCESTER
Come hither, friend: where is the king my master?
Here, sir; but trouble him not, his wits are gone.
Good friend, I prithee, take him in thy arms;
I have oerheard a plot of death upon him:
There is a litter ready; lay him in t,
And drive towards Dover, friend, where thou shalt meet
Both welcome and protection. Take up thy master:
If thou shouldst dally half an hour, his life,
With thine, and all that offer to defend him,
Stand in assured loss: take up, take up;
And follow me, that will to some provision
Give thee quick conduct.
Oppressed nature sleeps:
This rest might yet have balmd thy broken senses,
Which, if convenience will not allow,
Stand in hard cure.
To the Fool
Come, help to bear thy master;
Thou must not stay behind.
Come, come, away.
Exeunt all but EDGAR
When we our betters see bearing our woes,
We scarcely think our miseries our foes.
Who alone suffers suffers most i the mind,
Leaving free things and happy shows behind:
But then the mind much sufferance doth oer skip,
When grief hath mates, and bearing fellowship.
How light and portable my pain seems now,
When that which makes me bend makes the king bow,
He childed as I fatherd! Tom, away!
Mark the high noises; and thyself bewray,
When false opinion, whose wrong thought defiles thee,
In thy just proof, repeals and reconciles thee.
What will hap more to-night, safe scape the king!
Lurk, lurk.
Exit
SCENE VII. Gloucesters castle.
Enter CORNWALL, REGAN, GONERIL, EDMUND, and Servants
Post speedily to my lord your husband; show him
this letter: the army of France is landed. Seek
out the villain Gloucester.
Exeunt some of the Servants
Hang him instantly.
Pluck out his eyes.
Leave him to my displeasure. Edmund, keep you our
sister company: the revenges we are bound to take
upon your traitorous father are not fit for your
beholding. Advise the duke, where you are going, to
a most festinate preparation: we are bound to the
like. Our posts shall be swift and intelligent
betwixt us. Farewell, dear sister: farewell, my
lord of Gloucester.
Enter OSWALD
How now! wheres the king?
My lord of Gloucester hath conveyd him hence:
Some five or six and thirty of his knights,
Hot questrists after him, met him at gate;
Who, with some other of the lords dependants,
Are gone with him towards Dover; where they boast
To have well-armed friends.
Get horses for your mistress.
Farewell, sweet lord, and sister.
Edmund, farewell.
Exeunt GONERIL, EDMUND, and OSWALD
Go seek the traitor Gloucester,
Pinion him like a thief, bring him before us.
Exeunt other Servants
Though well we may not pass upon his life
Without the form of justice, yet our power
Shall do a courtesy to our wrath, which men
May blame, but not control. Whos there? the traitor?
Enter GLOUCESTER, brought in by two or three
Ingrateful fox! tis he.
Bind fast his corky arms.
What mean your graces? Good my friends, consider
You are my guests: do me no foul play, friends.
Bind him, I say.
Servants bind him
Hard, hard. O filthy traitor!
Unmerciful lady as you are, Im none.
To this chair bind him. Villain, thou shalt find--
REGAN plucks his beard
By the kind gods, tis most ignobly done
To pluck me by the beard.
So white, and such a traitor!
Naughty lady,
These hairs, which thou dost ravish from my chin,
Will quicken, and accuse thee: I am your host:
With robbers hands my hospitable favours
You should not ruffle thus. What will you do?
Come, sir, what letters had you late from France?
Be simple answerer, for we know the truth.
And what confederacy have you with the traitors
Late footed in the kingdom?
To whose hands have you sent the lunatic king? Speak.
I have a letter guessingly set down,
Which came from one thats of a neutral heart,
And not from one opposed.
Cunning.
And false.
Where hast thou sent the king?
To Dover.
Wherefore to Dover? Wast thou not charged at peril--
Wherefore to Dover? Let him first answer that.
I am tied to the stake, and I must stand the course.
Wherefore to Dover, sir?
Because I would not see thy cruel nails
Pluck out his poor old eyes; nor thy fierce sister
In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs.
The sea, with such a storm as his bare head
In hell-black night endured, would have buoyd up,
And quenchd the stelled fires:
Yet, poor old heart, he holp the heavens to rain.
If wolves had at thy gate howld that stern time,
Thou shouldst have said Good porter, turn the key,
All cruels else subscribed: but I shall see
The winged vengeance overtake such children.
Seet shalt thou never. Fellows, hold the chair.
Upon these eyes of thine Ill set my foot.
He that will think to live till he be old,
Give me some help! O cruel! O you gods!
One side will mock another; the other too.
If you see vengeance,--
Hold your hand, my lord:
I have served you ever since I was a child;
But better service have I never done you
Than now to bid you hold.
How now, you dog!
If you did wear a beard upon your chin,
Id shake it on this quarrel. What do you mean?
My villain!
They draw and fight
Nay, then, come on, and take the chance of anger.
Give me thy sword. A peasant stand up thus!
Takes a sword, and runs at him behind
O, I am slain! My lord, you have one eye left
To see some mischief on him. O!
Dies
Lest it see more, prevent it. Out, vile jelly!
Where is thy lustre now?
All dark and comfortless. Wheres my son Edmund?
Edmund, enkindle all the sparks of nature,
To quit this horrid act.
Out, treacherous villain!
Thou callst on him that hates thee: it was he
That made the overture of thy treasons to us;
Who is too good to pity thee.
O my follies! then Edgar was abused.
Kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
Go thrust him out at gates, and let him smell
His way to Dover.
Exit one with GLOUCESTER
How ist, my lord? how look you?
I have received a hurt: follow me, lady.
Turn out that eyeless villain; throw this slave
Upon the dunghill. Regan, I bleed apace:
Untimely comes this hurt: give me your arm.
Exit CORNWALL, led by REGAN
Ill never care what wickedness I do,
If this man come to good.
If she live long,
And in the end meet the old course of death,
Women will all turn monsters.
Lets follow the old earl, and get the Bedlam
To lead him where he would: his roguish madness
Allows itself to any thing.
Go thou: Ill fetch some flax and whites of eggs
To apply to his bleeding face. Now, heaven help him!
Exeunt severally
ACT IV
SCENE I. The heath.
Enter EDGAR
Yet better thus, and known to be contemnd,
Than still contemnd and flatterd. To be worst,
The lowest and most dejected thing of fortune,
Stands still in esperance, lives not in fear:
The lamentable change is from the best;
The worst returns to laughter. Welcome, then,
Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace!
The wretch that thou hast blown unto the worst
Owes nothing to thy blasts. But who comes here?
Enter GLOUCESTER, led by an Old Man
My father, poorly led? World, world, O world!
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee,
Lie would not yield to age.
O, my good lord, I have been your tenant, and
your fathers tenant, these fourscore years.
Away, get thee away; good friend, be gone:
Thy comforts can do me no good at all;
Thee they may hurt.
Alack, sir, you cannot see your way.
I have no way, and therefore want no eyes;
I stumbled when I saw: full oft tis seen,
Our means secure us, and our mere defects
Prove our commodities. O dear son Edgar,
The food of thy abused fathers wrath!
Might I but live to see thee in my touch,
Ild say I had eyes again!
How now! Whos there?
[Aside]  O gods! Who ist can say I am at
the worst?
I am worse than eer I was.
Tis poor mad Tom.
[Aside]  And worse I may be yet: the worst is not
So long as we can say  This is the worst.
Fellow, where goest?
Is it a beggar-man?
Madman and beggar too.
He has some reason, else he could not beg.
I the last nights storm I such a fellow saw;
Which made me think a man a worm: my son
Came then into my mind; and yet my mind
Was then scarce friends with him: I have heard
more since.
As flies to wanton boys, are we to the gods.
They kill us for their sport.
[Aside]How should this be?
Bad is the trade that must play fool to sorrow,
Angering itself and others.--Bless thee, master!
Is that the naked fellow?
Ay, my lord.
Then, prithee, get thee gone: if, for my sake,
Thou wilt oertake us, hence a mile or twain,
I the way toward Dover, do it for ancient love;
And bring some covering for this naked soul,
Who Ill entreat to lead me.
Alack, sir, he is mad.
Tis the times plague, when madmen lead the blind.
Do as I bid thee, or rather do thy pleasure;
Above the rest, be gone.
Ill bring him the best parel that I have,
Come ont what will.
Exit
Sirrah, naked fellow,--
Poor Toms a-cold.
Aside
I cannot daub it further.
Come hither, fellow.
[Aside]  And yet I must.--Bless thy sweet eyes, they bleed.
Knowst thou the way to Dover?
Both stile and gate, horse-way and foot-path. Poor
Tom hath been scared out of his good wits: bless
thee, good mans son, from the foul fiend! five
fiends have been in poor Tom at once; of lust, as
Obidicut; Hobbididence, prince of dumbness; Mahu, of
stealing; Modo, of murder; Flibbertigibbet, of
mopping and mowing, who since possesses chambermaids
and waiting-women. So, bless thee, master!
Here, take this purse, thou whom the heavens plagues
Have humbled to all strokes: that I am wretched
Makes thee the happier: heavens, deal so still!
Let the superfluous and lust-dieted man,
That slaves your ordinance, that will not see
Because he doth not feel, feel your power quickly;
So distribution should undo excess,
And each man have enough. Dost thou know Dover?
Ay, master.
There is a cliff, whose high and bending head
Looks fearfully in the confined deep:
Bring me but to the very brim of it,
And Ill repair the misery thou dost bear
With something rich about me: from that place
I shall no leading need.
Give me thy arm:
Poor Tom shall lead thee.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Before ALBANYs palace.
Enter GONERIL and EDMUND
Welcome, my lord: I marvel our mild husband
Not met us on the way.
Enter OSWALD
Now, wheres your master?
Madam, within; but never man so changed.
I told him of the army that was landed;
He smiled at it: I told him you were coming:
His answer was The worse: of Gloucesters treachery,
And of the loyal service of his son,
When I informd him, then he calld me sot,
And told me I had turnd the wrong side out:
What most he should dislike seems pleasant to him;
What like, offensive.
[To EDMUND]  Then shall you go no further.
It is the cowish terror of his spirit,
That dares not undertake: hell not feel wrongs
Which tie him to an answer. Our wishes on the way
May prove effects. Back, Edmund, to my brother;
Hasten his musters and conduct his powers:
I must change arms at home, and give the distaff
Into my husbands hands. This trusty servant
Shall pass between us: ere long you are like to hear,
If you dare venture in your own behalf,
A mistresss command. Wear this; spare speech;
Giving a favour
Decline your head: this kiss, if it durst speak,
Would stretch thy spirits up into the air:
Conceive, and fare thee well.
Yours in the ranks of death.
My most dear Gloucester!
Exit EDMUND
O, the difference of man and man!
To thee a womans services are due:
My fool usurps my body.
Madam, here comes my lord.
Exit
Enter ALBANY
I have been worth the whistle.
O Goneril!
You are not worth the dust which the rude wind
Blows in your face. I fear your disposition:
That nature, which contemns its origin,
Cannot be borderd certain in itself;
She that herself will sliver and disbranch
From her material sap, perforce must wither
And come to deadly use.
No more; the text is foolish.
Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile:
Filths savour but themselves. What have you done?
Tigers, not daughters, what have you performd?
A father, and a gracious aged man,
Whose reverence even the head-luggd bear would lick,
Most barbarous, most degenerate! have you madded.
Could my good brother suffer you to do it?
A man, a prince, by him so benefited!
If that the heavens do not their visible spirits
Send quickly down to tame these vile offences,
It will come,
Humanity must perforce prey on itself,
Like monsters of the deep.
Milk-liverd man!
That bearst a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs;
Who hast not in thy brows an eye discerning
Thine honour from thy suffering; that not knowst
Fools do those villains pity who are punishd
Ere they have done their mischief. Wheres thy drum?
France spreads his banners in our noiseless land;
With plumed helm thy slayer begins threats;
Whiles thou, a moral fool, sitst still, and criest
Alack, why does he so?
See thyself, devil!
Proper deformity seems not in the fiend
So horrid as in woman.
O vain fool!
Thou changed and self-coverd thing, for shame,
Be-monster not thy feature. Weret my fitness
To let these hands obey my blood,
They are apt enough to dislocate and tear
Thy flesh and bones: howeer thou art a fiend,
A womans shape doth shield thee.
Marry, your manhood now--
Enter a Messenger
What news?
O, my good lord, the Duke of Cornwalls dead:
Slain by his servant, going to put out
The other eye of Gloucester.
Gloucesters eye!
A servant that he bred, thrilld with remorse,
Opposed against the act, bending his sword
To his great master; who, thereat enraged,
Flew on him, and amongst them felld him dead;
But not without that harmful stroke, which since
Hath pluckd him after.
This shows you are above,
You justicers, that these our nether crimes
So speedily can venge! But, O poor Gloucester!
Lost he his other eye?
Both, both, my lord.
This letter, madam, craves a speedy answer;
Tis from your sister.
[Aside]              One way I like this well;
But being widow, and my Gloucester with her,
May all the building in my fancy pluck
Upon my hateful life: another way,
The news is not so tart.--Ill read, and answer.
Exit
Where was his son when they did take his eyes?
Come with my lady hither.
He is not here.
No, my good lord; I met him back again.
Knows he the wickedness?
Ay, my good lord; twas he informd against him;
And quit the house on purpose, that their punishment
Might have the freer course.
Gloucester, I live
To thank thee for the love thou showdst the king,
And to revenge thine eyes. Come hither, friend:
Tell me what more thou knowst.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The French camp near Dover.
Enter KENT and a Gentleman
Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back
know you the reason?
Something he left imperfect in the
state, which since his coming forth is thought
of; which imports to the kingdom so much
fear and danger, that his personal return was
most required and necessary.
Who hath he left behind him general?
The Marshal of France, Monsieur La Far.
Did your letters pierce the queen to any
demonstration of grief?
Ay, sir; she took them, read them in my presence;
And now and then an ample tear trilld down
Her delicate cheek: it seemd she was a queen
Over her passion; who, most rebel-like,
Sought to be king oer her.
O, then it moved her.
Not to a rage: patience and sorrow strove
Who should express her goodliest. You have seen
Sunshine and rain at once: her smiles and tears
Were like a better way: those happy smilets,
That playd on her ripe lip, seemd not to know
What guests were in her eyes; which parted thence,
As pearls from diamonds droppd. In brief,
Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved,
If all could so become it.
Made she no verbal question?
Faith, once or twice she heaved the name of father
Pantingly forth, as if it pressd her heart:
Cried Sisters! sisters! Shame of ladies! sisters!
Kent! father! sisters! What, i the storm? i the night?
Let pity not be believed! There she shook
The holy water from her heavenly eyes,
And clamour moistend: then away she started
To deal with grief alone.
It is the stars,
The stars above us, govern our conditions;
Else one self mate and mate could not beget
Such different issues. You spoke not with her since?
No.
Was this before the king returnd?
No, since.
Well, sir, the poor distressed Lears i the town;
Who sometime, in his better tune, remembers
What we are come about, and by no means
Will yield to see his daughter.
Why, good sir?
A sovereign shame so elbows him: his own unkindness,
That strippd her from his benediction, turnd her
To foreign casualties, gave her dear rights
To his dog-hearted daughters, these things sting
His mind so venomously, that burning shame
Detains him from Cordelia.
Alack, poor gentleman!
Of Albanys and Cornwalls powers you heard not?
Tis so, they are afoot.
Well, sir, Ill bring you to our master Lear,
And leave you to attend him: some dear cause
Will in concealment wrap me up awhile;
When I am known aright, you shall not grieve
Lending me this acquaintance. I pray you, go
Along with me.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. The same. A tent.
Enter, with drum and colours, CORDELIA, Doctor, and Soldiers
Alack, tis he: why, he was met even now
As mad as the vexd sea; singing aloud;
Crownd with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds,
With bur-docks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo-flowers,
Darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow
In our sustaining corn. A century send forth;
Search every acre in the high-grown field,
And bring him to our eye.
Exit an Officer
What can mans wisdom
In the restoring his bereaved sense?
He that helps him take all my outward worth.
There is means, madam:
Our foster-nurse of nature is repose,
The which he lacks; that to provoke in him,
Are many simples operative, whose power
Will close the eye of anguish.
All blest secrets,
All you unpublishd virtues of the earth,
Spring with my tears! be aidant and remediate
In the good mans distress! Seek, seek for him;
Lest his ungovernd rage dissolve the life
That wants the means to lead it.
Enter a Messenger
News, madam;
The British powers are marching hitherward.
Tis known before; our preparation stands
In expectation of them. O dear father,
It is thy business that I go about;
Therefore great France
My mourning and important tears hath pitied.
No blown ambition doth our arms incite,
But love, dear love, and our aged fathers right:
Soon may I hear and see him!
Exeunt
SCENE V. Gloucesters castle.
Enter REGAN and OSWALD
But are my brothers powers set forth?
Ay, madam.
Himself in person there?
Madam, with much ado:
Your sister is the better soldier.
Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home?
No, madam.
What might import my sisters letter to him?
I know not, lady.
Faith, he is posted hence on serious matter.
It was great ignorance, Gloucesters eyes being out,
To let him live: where he arrives he moves
All hearts against us: Edmund, I think, is gone,
In pity of his misery, to dispatch
His nighted life: moreover, to descry
The strength o the enemy.
I must needs after him, madam, with my letter.
Our troops set forth to-morrow: stay with us;
The ways are dangerous.
I may not, madam:
My lady charged my duty in this business.
Why should she write to Edmund? Might not you
Transport her purposes by word? Belike,
Something--I know not what: Ill love thee much,
Let me unseal the letter.
Madam, I had rather--
I know your lady does not love her husband;
I am sure of that: and at her late being here
She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks
To noble Edmund. I know you are of her bosom.
I, madam?
I speak in understanding; you are; I knowt:
Therefore I do advise you, take this note:
My lord is dead; Edmund and I have talkd;
And more convenient is he for my hand
Than for your ladys: you may gather more.
If you do find him, pray you, give him this;
And when your mistress hears thus much from you,
I pray, desire her call her wisdom to her.
So, fare you well.
If you do chance to hear of that blind traitor,
Preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
Would I could meet him, madam! I should show
What party I do follow.
Fare thee well.
Exeunt
SCENE VI. Fields near Dover.
Enter GLOUCESTER, and EDGAR dressed like a peasant
When shall we come to the top of that same hill?
You do climb up it now: look, how we labour.
Methinks the ground is even.
Horrible steep.
Hark, do you hear the sea?
No, truly.
Why, then, your other senses grow imperfect
By your eyes anguish.
So may it be, indeed:
Methinks thy voice is alterd; and thou speakst
In better phrase and matter than thou didst.
Youre much deceived: in nothing am I changed
But in my garments.
Methinks youre better spoken.
Come on, sir; heres the place: stand still. How fearful
And dizzy tis, to cast ones eyes so low!
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles: half way down
Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head:
The fishermen, that walk upon the beach,
Appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark,
Diminishd to her cock; her cock, a buoy
Almost too small for sight: the murmuring surge,
That on the unnumberd idle pebbles chafes,
Cannot be heard so high. Ill look no more;
Lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight
Topple down headlong.
Set me where you stand.
Give me your hand: you are now within a foot
Of the extreme verge: for all beneath the moon
Would I not leap upright.
Let go my hand.
Here, friend, s another purse; in it a jewel
Well worth a poor mans taking: fairies and gods
Prosper it with thee! Go thou farther off;
Bid me farewell, and let me hear thee going.
Now fare you well, good sir.
With all my heart.
Why I do trifle thus with his despair
Is done to cure it.
[Kneeling]  O you mighty gods!
This world I do renounce, and, in your sights,
Shake patiently my great affliction off:
If I could bear it longer, and not fall
To quarrel with your great opposeless wills,
My snuff and loathed part of nature should
Burn itself out. If Edgar live, O, bless him!
Now, fellow, fare thee well.
He falls forward
Gone, sir: farewell.
And yet I know not how conceit may rob
The treasury of life, when life itself
Yields to the theft: had he been where he thought,
By this, had thought been past. Alive or dead?
Ho, you sir! friend! Hear you, sir! speak!
Thus might he pass indeed: yet he revives.
What are you, sir?
Away, and let me die.
Hadst thou been aught but gossamer, feathers, air,
So many fathom down precipitating,
Thoudst shiverd like an egg: but thou dost breathe;
Hast heavy substance; bleedst not; speakst; art sound.
Ten masts at each make not the altitude
Which thou hast perpendicularly fell:
Thy lifes a miracle. Speak yet again.
But have I falln, or no?
From the dread summit of this chalky bourn.
Look up a-height; the shrill-gorged lark so far
Cannot be seen or heard: do but look up.
Alack, I have no eyes.
Is wretchedness deprived that benefit,
To end itself by death? Twas yet some comfort,
When misery could beguile the tyrants rage,
And frustrate his proud will.
Give me your arm:
Up: so. How is t? Feel you your legs? You stand.
Too well, too well.
This is above all strangeness.
Upon the crown o the cliff, what thing was that
Which parted from you?
A poor unfortunate beggar.
As I stood here below, methought his eyes
Were two full moons; he had a thousand noses,
Horns whelkd and waved like the enridged sea:
It was some fiend; therefore, thou happy father,
Think that the clearest gods, who make them honours
Of mens impossibilities, have preserved thee.
I do remember now: henceforth Ill bear
Affliction till it do cry out itself
Enough, enough, and die. That thing you speak of,
I took it for a man; often twould say
The fiend, the fiend: he led me to that place.
Bear free and patient thoughts. But who comes here?
Enter KING LEAR, fantastically dressed with wild flowers
The safer sense will neer accommodate
His master thus.
No, they cannot touch me for coining; I am the
king himself.
O thou side-piercing sight!
Natures above art in that respect. Theres your
press-money. That fellow handles his bow like a
crow-keeper: draw me a clothiers yard. Look,
look, a mouse! Peace, peace; this piece of toasted
cheese will do t. Theres my gauntlet; Ill prove
it on a giant. Bring up the brown bills. O, well
flown, bird! i the clout, i the clout: hewgh!
Give the word.
Sweet marjoram.
Pass.
I know that voice.
Ha! Goneril, with a white beard! They flattered
me like a dog; and told me I had white hairs in my
beard ere the black ones were there. To say ay
and no to every thing that I said!--Ay and no
too was no good divinity. When the rain came to
wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter; when
the thunder would not peace at my bidding; there I
found em, there I smelt em out. Go to, they are
not men o their words: they told me I was every
thing; tis a lie, I am not ague-proof.
The trick of that voice I do well remember:
Is t not the king?
Ay, every inch a king:
When I do stare, see how the subject quakes.
I pardon that mans life. What was thy cause? Adultery?
Thou shalt not die: die for adultery! No:
The wren goes to t, and the small gilded fly
Does lecher in my sight.
Let copulation thrive; for Gloucesters bastard son
Was kinder to his father than my daughters
Got tween the lawful sheets.
To t, luxury, pell-mell! for I lack soldiers.
Behold yond simpering dame,
Whose face between her forks presages snow;
That minces virtue, and does shake the head
To hear of pleasures name;
The fitchew, nor the soiled horse, goes to t
With a more riotous appetite.
Down from the waist they are Centaurs,
Though women all above:
But to the girdle do the gods inherit,
Beneath is all the fiends;
Theres hell, theres darkness, theres the
sulphurous pit,
Burning, scalding, stench, consumption; fie,
fie, fie! pah, pah! Give me an ounce of civet,
good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination:
theres money for thee.
O, let me kiss that hand!
Let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.
O ruind piece of nature! This great world
Shall so wear out to nought. Dost thou know me?
I remember thine eyes well enough. Dost thou squiny
at me? No, do thy worst, blind Cupid! Ill not
love. Read thou this challenge; mark but the
penning of it.
Were all the letters suns, I could not see one.
I would not take this from report; it is,
And my heart breaks at it.
Read.
What, with the case of eyes?
O, ho, are you there with me? No eyes in your
head, nor no money in your purse? Your eyes are in
a heavy case, your purse in a light; yet you see how
this world goes.
I see it feelingly.
What, art mad? A man may see how this world goes
with no eyes. Look with thine ears: see how yond
justice rails upon yond simple thief. Hark, in
thine ear: change places; and, handy-dandy, which
is the justice, which is the thief? Thou hast seen
a farmers dog bark at a beggar?
Ay, sir.
And the creature run from the cur? There thou
