mightst behold the great image of authority: a
dogs obeyed in office.
Thou rascal beadle, hold thy bloody hand!
Why dost thou lash that whore? Strip thine own back;
Thou hotly lustst to use her in that kind
For which thou whippst her. The usurer hangs the cozener.
Through tatterd clothes small vices do appear;
Robes and furrd gowns hide all. Plate sin with gold,
And the strong lance of justice hurtless breaks:
Arm it in rags, a pigmys straw does pierce it.
None does offend, none, I say, none; Ill able em:
Take that of me, my friend, who have the power
To seal the accusers lips. Get thee glass eyes;
And like a scurvy politician, seem
To see the things thou dost not. Now, now, now, now:
Pull off my boots: harder, harder: so.
O, matter and impertinency mixd! Reason in madness!
If thou wilt weep my fortunes, take my eyes.
I know thee well enough; thy name is Gloucester:
Thou must be patient; we came crying hither:
Thou knowst, the first time that we smell the air,
We wawl and cry. I will preach to thee: mark.
Alack, alack the day!
When we are born, we cry that we are come
To this great stage of fools: this a good block;
It were a delicate stratagem, to shoe
A troop of horse with felt: Ill put t in proof;
And when I have stoln upon these sons-in-law,
Then, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill, kill!
Enter a Gentleman, with Attendants
O, here he is: lay hand upon him. Sir,
Your most dear daughter--
No rescue? What, a prisoner? I am even
The natural fool of fortune. Use me well;
You shall have ransom. Let me have surgeons;
I am cut to the brains.
You shall have any thing.
No seconds? all myself?
Why, this would make a man a man of salt,
To use his eyes for garden water-pots,
Ay, and laying autumns dust.
Good sir,--
I will die bravely, like a bridegroom. What!
I will be jovial: come, come; I am a king,
My masters, know you that.
You are a royal one, and we obey you.
Then theres life int. Nay, if you get it, you
shall get it with running. Sa, sa, sa, sa.
Exit running; Attendants follow
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch,
Past speaking of in a king! Thou hast one daughter,
Who redeems nature from the general curse
Which twain have brought her to.
Hail, gentle sir.
Sir, speed you: whats your will?
Do you hear aught, sir, of a battle toward?
Most sure and vulgar: every one hears that,
Which can distinguish sound.
But, by your favour,
How nears the other army?
Near and on speedy foot; the main descry
Stands on the hourly thought.
I thank you, sir: thats all.
Though that the queen on special cause is here,
Her army is moved on.
I thank you, sir.
Exit Gentleman
You ever-gentle gods, take my breath from me:
Let not my worser spirit tempt me again
To die before you please!
Well pray you, father.
Now, good sir, what are you?
A most poor man, made tame to fortunes blows;
Who, by the art of known and feeling sorrows,
Am pregnant to good pity. Give me your hand,
Ill lead you to some biding.
Hearty thanks:
The bounty and the benison of heaven
To boot, and boot!
Enter OSWALD
A proclaimd prize! Most happy!
That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh
To raise my fortunes. Thou old unhappy traitor,
Briefly thyself remember: the sword is out
That must destroy thee.
Now let thy friendly hand
Put strength enough tot.
EDGAR interposes
Wherefore, bold peasant,
Darest thou support a publishd traitor? Hence;
Lest that the infection of his fortune take
Like hold on thee. Let go his arm.
Chill not let go, zir, without vurther casion.
Let go, slave, or thou diest!
Good gentleman, go your gait, and let poor volk
pass. An chud ha bin zwaggered out of my life,
twould not ha bin zo long as tis by a vortnight.
Nay, come not near th old man; keep out, che vor
ye, or ise try whether your costard or my ballow be
the harder: chill be plain with you.
Out, dunghill!
Chill pick your teeth, zir: come; no matter vor
your foins.
They fight, and EDGAR knocks him down
Slave, thou hast slain me: villain, take my purse:
If ever thou wilt thrive, bury my body;
And give the letters which thou findst about me
To Edmund earl of Gloucester; seek him out
Upon the British party: O, untimely death!
Dies
I know thee well: a serviceable villain;
As duteous to the vices of thy mistress
As badness would desire.
What, is he dead?
Sit you down, father; rest you
Lets see these pockets: the letters that he speaks of
May be my friends. Hes dead; I am only sorry
He had no other deaths-man. Let us see:
Leave, gentle wax; and, manners, blame us not:
To know our enemies minds, weld rip their hearts;
Their papers, is more lawful.
Reads
Let our reciprocal vows be remembered. You have
many opportunities to cut him off: if your will
want not, time and place will be fruitfully offered.
There is nothing done, if he return the conqueror:
then am I the prisoner, and his bed my goal; from
the loathed warmth whereof deliver me, and supply
the place for your labour.
Your--wife, so I would say--
Affectionate servant,
GONERIL.
O undistinguishd space of womans will!
A plot upon her virtuous husbands life;
And the exchange my brother! Here, in the sands,
Thee Ill rake up, the post unsanctified
Of murderous lechers: and in the mature time
With this ungracious paper strike the sight
Of the death practised duke: for him tis well
That of thy death and business I can tell.
The king is mad: how stiff is my vile sense,
That I stand up, and have ingenious feeling
Of my huge sorrows! Better I were distract:
So should my thoughts be severd from my griefs,
And woes by wrong imaginations lose
The knowledge of themselves.
Give me your hand:
Drum afar off
Far off, methinks, I hear the beaten drum:
Come, father, Ill bestow you with a friend.
Exeunt
SCENE VII. A tent in the French camp. LEAR on a bed asleep,
soft music playing; Gentleman, and others attending.
Enter CORDELIA, KENT, and Doctor
O thou good Kent, how shall I live and work,
To match thy goodness? My life will be too short,
And every measure fail me.
To be acknowledged, madam, is oerpaid.
All my reports go with the modest truth;
Nor more nor clippd, but so.
Be better suited:
These weeds are memories of those worser hours:
I prithee, put them off.
Pardon me, dear madam;
Yet to be known shortens my made intent:
My boon I make it, that you know me not
Till time and I think meet.
Then bet so, my good lord.
To the Doctor
How does the king?
Madam, sleeps still.
O you kind gods,
Cure this great breach in his abused nature!
The untuned and jarring senses, O, wind up
Of this child-changed father!
So please your majesty
That we may wake the king: he hath slept long.
Be governd by your knowledge, and proceed
I the sway of your own will. Is he arrayd?
Ay, madam; in the heaviness of his sleep
We put fresh garments on him.
Be by, good madam, when we do awake him;
I doubt not of his temperance.
Very well.
Please you, draw near. Louder the music there!
O my dear father! Restoration hang
Thy medicine on my lips; and let this kiss
Repair those violent harms that my two sisters
Have in thy reverence made!
Kind and dear princess!
Had you not been their father, these white flakes
Had challenged pity of them. Was this a face
To be opposed against the warring winds?
To stand against the deep dread-bolted thunder?
In the most terrible and nimble stroke
Of quick, cross lightning? to watch--poor perdu!--
With this thin helm? Mine enemys dog,
Though he had bit me, should have stood that night
Against my fire; and wast thou fain, poor father,
To hovel thee with swine, and rogues forlorn,
In short and musty straw? Alack, alack!
Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once
Had not concluded all. He wakes; speak to him.
Madam, do you; tis fittest.
How does my royal lord? How fares your majesty?
You do me wrong to take me out o the grave:
Thou art a soul in bliss; but I am bound
Upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears
Do scald like moulten lead.
Sir, do you know me?
You are a spirit, I know: when did you die?
Still, still, far wide!
Hes scarce awake: let him alone awhile.
Where have I been? Where am I? Fair daylight?
I am mightily abused. I should een die with pity,
To see another thus. I know not what to say.
I will not swear these are my hands: lets see;
I feel this pin prick. Would I were assured
Of my condition!
O, look upon me, sir,
And hold your hands in benediction oer me:
No, sir, you must not kneel.
Pray, do not mock me:
I am a very foolish fond old man,
Fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less;
And, to deal plainly,
I fear I am not in my perfect mind.
Methinks I should know you, and know this man;
Yet I am doubtful for I am mainly ignorant
What place this is; and all the skill I have
Remembers not these garments; nor I know not
Where I did lodge last night. Do not laugh at me;
For, as I am a man, I think this lady
To be my child Cordelia.
And so I am, I am.
Be your tears wet? yes, faith. I pray, weep not:
If you have poison for me, I will drink it.
I know you do not love me; for your sisters
Have, as I do remember, done me wrong:
You have some cause, they have not.
No cause, no cause.
Am I in France?
In your own kingdom, sir.
Do not abuse me.
Be comforted, good madam: the great rage,
You see, is killd in him: and yet it is danger
To make him even oer the time he has lost.
Desire him to go in; trouble him no more
Till further settling.
Willt please your highness walk?
You must bear with me:
Pray you now, forget and forgive: I am old and foolish.
Exeunt all but KENT and Gentleman
Holds it true, sir, that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain?
Most certain, sir.
Who is conductor of his people?
As tis said, the bastard son of Gloucester.
They say Edgar, his banished son, is with the Earl
of Kent in Germany.
Report is changeable. Tis time to look about; the
powers of the kingdom approach apace.
The arbitrement is like to be bloody. Fare you
well, sir.
Exit
My point and period will be throughly wrought,
Or well or ill, as this days battles fought.
Exit
ACT V
SCENE I. The British camp, near Dover.
Enter, with drum and colours, EDMUND, REGAN, Gentlemen, and Soldiers.
Know of the duke if his last purpose hold,
Or whether since he is advised by aught
To change the course: hes full of alteration
And self-reproving: bring his constant pleasure.
To a Gentleman, who goes out
Our sisters man is certainly miscarried.
Tis to be doubted, madam.
Now, sweet lord,
You know the goodness I intend upon you:
Tell me--but truly--but then speak the truth,
Do you not love my sister?
In honourd love.
But have you never found my brothers way
To the forfended place?
That thought abuses you.
I am doubtful that you have been conjunct
And bosomd with her, as far as we call hers.
No, by mine honour, madam.
I never shall endure her: dear my lord,
Be not familiar with her.
Fear me not:
She and the duke her husband!
Enter, with drum and colours, ALBANY, GONERIL, and Soldiers
[Aside]  I had rather lose the battle than that sister
Should loosen him and me.
Our very loving sister, well be-met.
Sir, this I hear; the king is come to his daughter,
With others whom the rigor of our state
Forced to cry out. Where I could not be honest,
I never yet was valiant: for this business,
It toucheth us, as France invades our land,
Not bolds the king, with others, whom, I fear,
Most just and heavy causes make oppose.
Sir, you speak nobly.
Why is this reasond?
Combine together gainst the enemy;
For these domestic and particular broils
Are not the question here.
Lets then determine
With the ancient of war on our proceedings.
I shall attend you presently at your tent.
Sister, youll go with us?
No.
Tis most convenient; pray you, go with us.
[Aside]  O, ho, I know the riddle.--I will go.
As they are going out, enter EDGAR disguised
If eer your grace had speech with man so poor,
Hear me one word.
Ill overtake you. Speak.
Exeunt all but ALBANY and EDGAR
Before you fight the battle, ope this letter.
If you have victory, let the trumpet sound
For him that brought it: wretched though I seem,
I can produce a champion that will prove
What is avouched there. If you miscarry,
Your business of the world hath so an end,
And machination ceases. Fortune love you.
Stay till I have read the letter.
I was forbid it.
When time shall serve, let but the herald cry,
And Ill appear again.
Why, fare thee well: I will oerlook thy paper.
Exit EDGAR
Re-enter EDMUND
The enemys in view; draw up your powers.
Here is the guess of their true strength and forces
By diligent discovery; but your haste
Is now urged on you.
We will greet the time.
Exit
To both these sisters have I sworn my love;
Each jealous of the other, as the stung
Are of the adder. Which of them shall I take?
Both? one? or neither? Neither can be enjoyd,
If both remain alive: to take the widow
Exasperates, makes mad her sister Goneril;
And hardly shall I carry out my side,
Her husband being alive. Now then well use
His countenance for the battle; which being done,
Let her who would be rid of him devise
His speedy taking off. As for the mercy
Which he intends to Lear and to Cordelia,
The battle done, and they within our power,
Shall never see his pardon; for my state
Stands on me to defend, not to debate.
Exit
SCENE II. A field between the two camps.
Alarum within. Enter, with drum and colours,  KING LEAR, CORDELIA, and Soldiers, over the stage; and exeunt
Enter EDGAR and GLOUCESTER
Here, father, take the shadow of this tree
For your good host; pray that the right may thrive:
If ever I return to you again,
Ill bring you comfort.
Grace go with you, sir!
Exit EDGAR
Alarum and retreat within. Re-enter EDGAR
Away, old man; give me thy hand; away!
King Lear hath lost, he and his daughter taen:
Give me thy hand; come on.
No farther, sir; a man may rot even here.
What, in ill thoughts again? Men must endure
Their going hence, even as their coming hither;
Ripeness is all: come on.
And thats true too.
Exeunt
SCENE III. The British camp near Dover.
Enter, in conquest, with drum and colours, EDMUND,  KING LEAR and CORDELIA, prisoners; Captain, Soldiers,  and c
Some officers take them away: good guard,
Until their greater pleasures first be known
That are to censure them.
We are not the first
Who, with best meaning, have incurrd the worst.
For thee, oppressed king, am I cast down;
Myself could else out-frown false fortunes frown.
Shall we not see these daughters and these sisters?
No, no, no, no! Come, lets away to prison:
We two alone will sing like birds i the cage:
When thou dost ask me blessing, Ill kneel down,
And ask of thee forgiveness: so well live,
And pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh
At gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues
Talk of court news; and well talk with them too,
Who loses and who wins; whos in, whos out;
And take upons the mystery of things,
As if we were Gods spies: and well wear out,
In a walld prison, packs and sects of great ones,
That ebb and flow by the moon.
Take them away.
Upon such sacrifices, my Cordelia,
The gods themselves throw incense. Have I caught thee?
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven,
And fire us hence like foxes. Wipe thine eyes;
The good-years shall devour them, flesh and fell,
Ere they shall make us weep: well see em starve
first. Come.
Exeunt KING LEAR and CORDELIA, guarded
Come hither, captain; hark.
Take thou this note;
Giving a paper
go follow them to prison:
One step I have advanced thee; if thou dost
As this instructs thee, thou dost make thy way
To noble fortunes: know thou this, that men
Are as the time is: to be tender-minded
Does not become a sword: thy great employment
Will not bear question; either say thoult do t,
Or thrive by other means.
Ill do t, my lord.
About it; and write happy when thou hast done.
Mark, I say, instantly; and carry it so
As I have set it down.
I cannot draw a cart, nor eat dried oats;
If it be mans work, Ill do t.
Exit
Flourish. Enter ALBANY, GONERIL, REGAN, another Captain, and Soldiers
Sir, you have shown to-day your valiant strain,
And fortune led you well: you have the captives
That were the opposites of this days strife:
We do require them of you, so to use them
As we shall find their merits and our safety
May equally determine.
Sir, I thought it fit
To send the old and miserable king
To some retention and appointed guard;
Whose age has charms in it, whose title more,
To pluck the common bosom on his side,
An turn our impressd lances in our eyes
Which do command them. With him I sent the queen;
My reason all the same; and they are ready
To-morrow, or at further space, to appear
Where you shall hold your session. At this time
We sweat and bleed: the friend hath lost his friend;
And the best quarrels, in the heat, are cursed
By those that feel their sharpness:
The question of Cordelia and her father
Requires a fitter place.
Sir, by your patience,
I hold you but a subject of this war,
Not as a brother.
Thats as we list to grace him.
Methinks our pleasure might have been demanded,
Ere you had spoke so far. He led our powers;
Bore the commission of my place and person;
The which immediacy may well stand up,
And call itself your brother.
Not so hot:
In his own grace he doth exalt himself,
More than in your addition.
In my rights,
By me invested, he compeers the best.
That were the most, if he should husband you.
Jesters do oft prove prophets.
Holla, holla!
That eye that told you so lookd but a-squint.
Lady, I am not well; else I should answer
From a full-flowing stomach. General,
Take thou my soldiers, prisoners, patrimony;
Dispose of them, of me; the walls are thine:
Witness the world, that I create thee here
My lord and master.
Mean you to enjoy him?
The let-alone lies not in your good will.
Nor in thine, lord.
Half-blooded fellow, yes.
[To EDMUND]  Let the drum strike, and prove my title thine.
Stay yet; hear reason. Edmund, I arrest thee
On capital treason; and, in thine attaint,
This gilded serpent
Pointing to Goneril
For your claim, fair sister,
I bar it in the interest of my wife:
Tis she is sub-contracted to this lord,
And I, her husband, contradict your bans.
If you will marry, make your loves to me,
My lady is bespoke.
An interlude!
Thou art armd, Gloucester: let the trumpet sound:
If none appear to prove upon thy head
Thy heinous, manifest, and many treasons,
There is my pledge;
Throwing down a glove
Ill prove it on thy heart,
Ere I taste bread, thou art in nothing less
Than I have here proclaimd thee.
Sick, O, sick!
[Aside]  If not, Ill neer trust medicine.
Theres my exchange:
Throwing down a glove
what in the world he is
That names me traitor, villain-like he lies:
Call by thy trumpet: he that dares approach,
On him, on you, who not? I will maintain
My truth and honour firmly.
A herald, ho!
A herald, ho, a herald!
Trust to thy single virtue; for thy soldiers,
All levied in my name, have in my name
Took their discharge.
My sickness grows upon me.
She is not well; convey her to  my tent.
Exit Regan, led
Enter a Herald
Come hither, herald,--Let the trumpet sound,
And read out this.
Sound, trumpet!
A trumpet sounds
[Reads]  If any man of quality or degree within
the lists of the army will maintain upon Edmund,
supposed Earl of Gloucester, that he is a manifold
traitor, let him appear by the third sound of the
trumpet: he is bold in his defence.
Sound!
First trumpet
Again!
Second trumpet
Again!
Third trumpet
Trumpet answers within
Enter EDGAR, at the third sound, armed, with a trumpet before him
Ask him his purposes, why he appears
Upon this call o the trumpet.
What are you?
Your name, your quality? and why you answer
This present summons?
Know, my name is lost;
By treasons tooth bare-gnawn and canker-bit:
Yet am I noble as the adversary
I come to cope.
Which is that adversary?
Whats he that speaks for Edmund Earl of Gloucester?
Himself: what sayst thou to him?
Draw thy sword,
That, if my speech offend a noble heart,
Thy arm may do thee justice: here is mine.
Behold, it is the privilege of mine honours,
My oath, and my profession: I protest,
Maugre thy strength, youth, place, and eminence,
Despite thy victor sword and fire-new fortune,
Thy valour and thy heart, thou art a traitor;
False to thy gods, thy brother, and thy father;
Conspirant gainst this high-illustrious prince;
And, from the extremest upward of thy head
To the descent and dust below thy foot,
A most toad-spotted traitor. Say thou No,
This sword, this arm, and my best spirits, are bent
To prove upon thy heart, whereto I speak,
Thou liest.
In wisdom I should ask thy name;
But, since thy outside looks so fair and warlike,
And that thy tongue some say of breeding breathes,
What safe and nicely I might well delay
By rule of knighthood, I disdain and spurn:
Back do I toss these treasons to thy head;
With the hell-hated lie oerwhelm thy heart;
Which, for they yet glance by and scarcely bruise,
This sword of mine shall give them instant way,
Where they shall rest for ever. Trumpets, speak!
Alarums. They fight. EDMUND falls
Save him, save him!
This is practise, Gloucester:
By the law of arms thou wast not bound to answer
An unknown opposite; thou art not vanquishd,
But cozend and beguiled.
Shut your mouth, dame,
Or with this paper shall I stop it: Hold, sir:
Thou worse than any name, read thine own evil:
No tearing, lady: I perceive you know it.
Gives the letter to EDMUND
Say, if I do, the laws are mine, not thine:
Who can arraign me fort.
Most monstrous! oh!
Knowst thou this paper?
Ask me not what I know.
Exit
Go after her: shes desperate; govern her.
What you have charged me with, that have I done;
And more, much more; the time will bring it out:
Tis past, and so am I. But what art thou
That hast this fortune on me? If thourt noble,
I do forgive thee.
Lets exchange charity.
I am no less in blood than thou art, Edmund;
If more, the more thou hast wrongd me.
My name is Edgar, and thy fathers son.
The gods are just, and of our pleasant vices
Make instruments to plague us:
The dark and vicious place where thee he got
Cost him his eyes.
Thou hast spoken right, tis true;
The wheel is come full circle: I am here.
Methought thy very gait did prophesy
A royal nobleness: I must embrace thee:
Let sorrow split my heart, if ever I
Did hate thee or thy father!
Worthy prince, I knowt.
Where have you hid yourself?
How have you known the miseries of your father?
By nursing them, my lord. List a brief tale;
And when tis told, O, that my heart would burst!
The bloody proclamation to escape,
That followd me so near,--O, our lives sweetness!
That we the pain of death would hourly die
Rather than die at once!--taught me to shift
Into a madmans rags; to assume a semblance
That very dogs disdaind: and in this habit
Met I my father with his bleeding rings,
Their precious stones new lost: became his guide,
Led him, beggd for him, saved him from despair;
Never,--O fault!--reveald myself unto him,
Until some half-hour past, when I was armd:
Not sure, though hoping, of this good success,
I askd his blessing, and from first to last
Told him my pilgrimage: but his flawd heart,
Alack, too weak the conflict to support!
Twixt two extremes of passion, joy and grief,
Burst smilingly.
This speech of yours hath moved me,
And shall perchance do good: but speak you on;
You look as you had something more to say.
If there be more, more woeful, hold it in;
For I am almost ready to dissolve,
Hearing of this.
This would have seemd a period
To such as love not sorrow; but another,
To amplify too much, would make much more,
And top extremity.
Whilst I was big in clamour came there in a man,
Who, having seen me in my worst estate,
Shunnd my abhorrd society; but then, finding
Who twas that so endured, with his strong arms
He fastened on my neck, and bellowd out
As held burst heaven; threw him on my father;
Told the most piteous tale of Lear and him
That ever ear received: which in recounting
His grief grew puissant and the strings of life
Began to crack: twice then the trumpets sounded,
And there I left him tranced.
But who was this?
Kent, sir, the banishd Kent; who in disguise
Followd his enemy king, and did him service
Improper for a slave.
Enter a Gentleman, with a bloody knife
Help, help, O, help!
What kind of help?
Speak, man.
What means that bloody knife?
Tis hot, it smokes;
It came even from the heart of--O, shes dead!
Who dead? speak, man.
Your lady, sir, your lady: and her sister
By her is poisoned; she hath confessd it.
I was contracted to them both: all three
Now marry in an instant.
Here comes Kent.
Produce their bodies, be they alive or dead:
This judgment of the heavens, that makes us tremble,
Touches us not with pity.
Exit Gentleman
Enter KENT
O, is this he?
The time will not allow the compliment
Which very manners urges.
I am come
To bid my king and master aye good night:
Is he not here?
Great thing of us forgot!
Speak, Edmund, wheres the king? and wheres Cordelia?
Seest thou this object, Kent?
The bodies of GONERIL and REGAN are brought in
Alack, why thus?
Yet Edmund was beloved:
The one the other poisond for my sake,
And after slew herself.
Even so. Cover their faces.
I pant for life: some good I mean to do,
Despite of mine own nature. Quickly send,
Be brief in it, to the castle; for my writ
Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia:
Nay, send in time.
Run, run, O, run!
To who, my lord? Who hath the office? send
Thy token of reprieve.
Well thought on: take my sword,
Give it the captain.
Haste thee, for thy life.
Exit EDGAR
He hath commission from thy wife and me
To hang Cordelia in the prison, and
To lay the blame upon her own despair,
That she fordid herself.
The gods defend her! Bear him hence awhile.
EDMUND is borne off
Re-enter KING LEAR, with CORDELIA dead in his arms; EDGAR, Captain, and others following
Howl, howl, howl, howl! O, you are men of stones:
Had I your tongues and eyes, Ild use them so
That heavens vault should crack. Shes gone for ever!
I know when one is dead, and when one lives;
Shes dead as earth. Lend me a looking-glass;
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone,
Why, then she lives.
Is this the promised end
Or image of that horror?
Fall, and cease!
This feather stirs; she lives! if it be so,
It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows
That ever I have felt.
[Kneeling]  O my good master!
Prithee, away.
Tis noble Kent, your friend.
A plague upon you, murderers, traitors all!
I might have saved her; now shes gone for ever!
Cordelia, Cordelia! stay a little. Ha!
What ist thou sayst? Her voice was ever soft,
Gentle, and low, an excellent thing in woman.
I killd the slave that was a-hanging thee.
Tis true, my lords, he did.
Did I not, fellow?
I have seen the day, with my good biting falchion
I would have made them skip: I am old now,
And these same crosses spoil me. Who are you?
Mine eyes are not o the best: Ill tell you straight.
If fortune brag of two she loved and hated,
One of them we behold.
This is a dull sight. Are you not Kent?
The same,
Your servant Kent: Where is your servant Caius?
Hes a good fellow, I can tell you that;
Hell strike, and quickly too: hes dead and rotten.
No, my good lord; I am the very man,--
Ill see that straight.
That, from your first of difference and decay,
Have followd your sad steps.
You are welcome hither.
Nor no man else: alls cheerless, dark, and deadly.
Your eldest daughters have fordone them selves,
And desperately are dead.
Ay, so I think.
He knows not what he says: and vain it is
That we present us to him.
Very bootless.
Enter a Captain
Edmund is dead, my lord.
Thats but a trifle here.
You lords and noble friends, know our intent.
What comfort to this great decay may come
Shall be applied: for us we will resign,
During the life of this old majesty,
To him our absolute power:
To EDGAR and KENT
you, to your rights:
With boot, and such addition as your honours
Have more than merited. All friends shall taste
The wages of their virtue, and all foes
The cup of their deservings. O, see, see!
And my poor fool is hangd! No, no, no life!
Why should a dog, a horse, a rat, have life,
And thou no breath at all? Thoult come no more,
Never, never, never, never, never!
Pray you, undo this button: thank you, sir.
Do you see this? Look on her, look, her lips,
Look there, look there!
Dies
He faints! My lord, my lord!
Break, heart; I prithee, break!
Look up, my lord.
Vex not his ghost: O, let him pass! he hates him much
That would upon the rack of this tough world
Stretch him out longer.
He is gone, indeed.
The wonder is, he hath endured so long:
He but usurpd his life.
Bear them from hence. Our present business
Is general woe.
To KENT and EDGAR
Friends of my soul, you twain
Rule in this realm, and the gored state sustain.
I have a journey, sir, shortly to go;
My master calls me, I must not say no.
The weight of this sad time we must obey;
Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
The oldest hath borne most: we that are young
Shall never see so much, nor live so long.
Exeunt, with a dead march
ACT I
SCENE I. The king of Navarres park.
Enter FERDINAND king of Navarre, BIRON, LONGAVILLE and DUMAIN
Let fame, that all hunt after in their lives,
Live registerd upon our brazen tombs
And then grace us in the disgrace of death;
When, spite of cormorant devouring Time,
The endeavor of this present breath may buy
That honour which shall bate his scythes keen edge
And make us heirs of all eternity.
Therefore, brave conquerors,--for so you are,
That war against your own affections
And the huge army of the worlds desires,--
Our late edict shall strongly stand in force:
Navarre shall be the wonder of the world;
Our court shall be a little Academe,
Still and contemplative in living art.
You three, Biron, Dumain, and Longaville,
Have sworn for three years term to live with me
My fellow-scholars, and to keep those statutes
That are recorded in this schedule here:
Your oaths are passd; and now subscribe your names,
That his own hand may strike his honour down
That violates the smallest branch herein:
If you are armd to do as sworn to do,
Subscribe to your deep oaths, and keep it too.
I am resolved; tis but a three years fast:
The mind shall banquet, though the body pine:
Fat paunches have lean pates, and dainty bits
Make rich the ribs, but bankrupt quite the wits.
My loving lord, Dumain is mortified:
The grosser manner of these worlds delights
He throws upon the gross worlds baser slaves:
To love, to wealth, to pomp, I pine and die;
With all these living in philosophy.
I can but say their protestation over;
So much, dear liege, I have already sworn,
That is, to live and study here three years.
But there are other strict observances;
As, not to see a woman in that term,
Which I hope well is not enrolled there;
And one day in a week to touch no food
And but one meal on every day beside,
The which I hope is not enrolled there;
And then, to sleep but three hours in the night,
And not be seen to wink of all the day--
When I was wont to think no harm all night
And make a dark night too of half the day--
Which I hope well is not enrolled there:
O, these are barren tasks, too hard to keep,
Not to see ladies, study, fast, not sleep!
Your oath is passd to pass away from these.
Let me say no, my liege, an if you please:
I only swore to study with your grace
And stay here in your court for three years space.
You swore to that, Biron, and to the rest.
By yea and nay, sir, then I swore in jest.
What is the end of study? let me know.
Why, that to know, which else we should not know.
Things hid and barrd, you mean, from common sense?
Ay, that is studys godlike recompense.
Come on, then; I will swear to study so,
To know the thing I am forbid to know:
As thus,--to study where I well may dine,
When I to feast expressly am forbid;
Or study where to meet some mistress fine,
When mistresses from common sense are hid;
Or, having sworn too hard a keeping oath,
Study to break it and not break my troth.
If studys gain be thus and this be so,
Study knows that which yet it doth not know:
Swear me to this, and I will neer say no.
These be the stops that hinder study quite
And train our intellects to vain delight.
Why, all delights are vain; but that most vain,
Which with pain purchased doth inherit pain:
As, painfully to pore upon a book
To seek the light of truth; while truth the while
Doth falsely blind the eyesight of his look:
Light seeking light doth light of light beguile:
So, ere you find where light in darkness lies,
Your light grows dark by losing of your eyes.
Study me how to please the eye indeed
By fixing it upon a fairer eye,
Who dazzling so, that eye shall be his heed
And give him light that it was blinded by.
Study is like the heavens glorious sun
That will not be deep-searchd with saucy looks:
Small have continual plodders ever won
Save base authority from others books
These earthly godfathers of heavens lights
That give a name to every fixed star
Have no more profit of their shining nights
Than those that walk and wot not what they are.
Too much to know is to know nought but fame;
And every godfather can give a name.
How well hes read, to reason against reading!
Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding!
He weeds the corn and still lets grow the weeding.
The spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
How follows that?
Fit in his place and time.
In reason nothing.
Something then in rhyme.
Biron is like an envious sneaping frost,
That bites the first-born infants of the spring.
Well, say I am; why should proud summer boast
Before the birds have any cause to sing?
Why should I joy in any abortive birth?
At Christmas I no more desire a rose
Than wish a snow in Mays new-fangled mirth;
But like of each thing that in season grows.
So you, to study now it is too late,
Climb oer the house to unlock the little gate.
Well, sit you out: go home, Biron: adieu.
No, my good lord; I have sworn to stay with you:
And though I have for barbarism spoke more
Than for that angel knowledge you can say,
Yet confident Ill keep what I have swore
And bide the penance of each three years day.
Give me the paper; let me read the same;
And to the strictst decrees Ill write my name.
How well this yielding rescues thee from shame!
[Reads]  Item, That no woman shall come within a
mile of my court: Hath this been proclaimed?
Four days ago.
Lets see the penalty.
Reads
On pain of losing her tongue. Who devised this penalty?
Marry, that did I.
Sweet lord, and why?
To fright them hence with that dread penalty.
A dangerous law against gentility!
Reads
Item, If any man be seen to talk with a woman
within the term of three years, he shall endure such
public shame as the rest of the court can possibly devise.
This article, my liege, yourself must break;
For well you know here comes in embassy
The French kings daughter with yourself to speak--
A maid of grace and complete majesty--
About surrender up of Aquitaine
To her decrepit, sick and bedrid father:
Therefore this article is made in vain,
Or vainly comes the admired princess hither.
What say you, lords? Why, this was quite forgot.
So study evermore is overshot:
While it doth study to have what it would
It doth forget to do the thing it should,
And when it hath the thing it hunteth most,
Tis won as towns with fire, so won, so lost.
We must of force dispense with this decree;
She must lie here on mere necessity.
Necessity will make us all forsworn
Three thousand times within this three years space;
For every man with his affects is born,
Not by might masterd but by special grace:
If I break faith, this word shall speak for me;
I am forsworn on mere necessity.
So to the laws at large I write my name:
Subscribes
And he that breaks them in the least degree
Stands in attainder of eternal shame:
Suggestions are to other as to me;
But I believe, although I seem so loath,
I am the last that will last keep his oath.
But is there no quick recreation granted?
Ay, that there is. Our court, you know, is haunted
With a refined traveller of Spain;
A man in all the worlds new fashion planted,
That hath a mint of phrases in his brain;
One whom the music of his own vain tongue
Doth ravish like enchanting harmony;
A man of complements, whom right and wrong
Have chose as umpire of their mutiny:
This child of fancy, that Armado hight,
For interim to our studies shall relate
In high-born words the worth of many a knight
From tawny Spain lost in the worlds debate.
How you delight, my lords, I know not, I;
But, I protest, I love to hear him lie
And I will use him for my minstrelsy.
Armado is a most illustrious wight,
A man of fire-new words, fashions own knight.
Costard the swain and he shall be our sport;
And so to study, three years is but short.
Enter DULL with a letter, and COSTARD
Which is the dukes own person?
This, fellow: what wouldst?
I myself reprehend his own person, for I am his
graces tharborough: but I would see his own person
in flesh and blood.
This is he.
Signior Arme--Arme--commends you. Theres villany
abroad: this letter will tell you more.
Sir, the contempts thereof are as touching me.
A letter from the magnificent Armado.
How low soever the matter, I hope in God for high words.
A high hope for a low heaven: God grant us patience!
To hear? or forbear laughing?
To hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or to
forbear both.
Well, sir, be it as the style shall give us cause to
climb in the merriness.
The matter is to me, sir, as concerning Jaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
In what manner?
