In manner and form following, sir; all those three:
I was seen with her in the manor-house, sitting with
her upon the form, and taken following her into the
park; which, put together, is in manner and form
following. Now, sir, for the manner,--it is the
manner of a man to speak to a woman: for the form,--
in some form.
For the following, sir?
As it shall follow in my correction: and God defend
the right!
Will you hear this letter with attention?
As we would hear an oracle.
Such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
[Reads]  Great deputy, the welkins vicegerent and
sole dominator of Navarre, my souls earths god,
and bodys fostering patron.
Not a word of Costard yet.
[Reads]  So it is,--
It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is, in
telling true, but so.
Peace!
Be to me and every man that dares not fight!
No words!
Of other mens secrets, I beseech you.
[Reads]  So it is, besieged with sable-coloured
melancholy, I did commend the black-oppressing humour
to the most wholesome physic of thy health-giving
air; and, as I am a gentleman, betook myself to
walk. The time when. About the sixth hour; when
beasts most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down
to that nourishment which is called supper: so much
for the time when. Now for the ground which; which,
I mean, I walked upon: it is y-cleped thy park. Then
for the place where; where, I mean, I did encounter
that obscene and preposterous event, that draweth
from my snow-white pen the ebon-coloured ink, which
here thou viewest, beholdest, surveyest, or seest;
but to the place where; it standeth north-north-east
and by east from the west corner of thy curious-
knotted garden: there did I see that low-spirited
swain, that base minnow of thy mirth,--
Me?
[Reads]  that unlettered small-knowing soul,--
Me?
[Reads]  that shallow vassal,--
Still me?
[Reads]  which, as I remember, hight Costard,--
O, me!
[Reads]  sorted and consorted, contrary to thy
established proclaimed edict and continent canon,
which with,--O, with--but with this I passion to say
wherewith,--
With a wench.
[Reads]  with a child of our grandmother Eve, a
female; or, for thy more sweet understanding, a
woman. Him I, as my ever-esteemed duty pricks me on,
have sent to thee, to receive the meed of
punishment, by thy sweet graces officer, Anthony
Dull; a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, and
estimation.
Me, ant shall please you; I am Anthony Dull.
[Reads]  For Jaquenetta,--so is the weaker vessel
called which I apprehended with the aforesaid
swain,--I keep her as a vessel of the laws fury;
and shall, at the least of thy sweet notice, bring
her to trial. Thine, in all compliments of devoted
and heart-burning heat of duty.
DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.
This is not so well as I looked for, but the best
that ever I heard.
Ay, the best for the worst. But, sirrah, what say
you to this?
Sir, I confess the wench.
Did you hear the proclamation?
I do confess much of the hearing it but little of
the marking of it.
It was proclaimed a years imprisonment, to be taken
with a wench.
I was taken with none, sir: I was taken with a damsel.
Well, it was proclaimed damsel.
This was no damsel, neither, sir; she was a virgin.
It is so varied, too; for it was proclaimed virgin.
If it were, I deny her virginity: I was taken with a maid.
This maid will not serve your turn, sir.
This maid will serve my turn, sir.
Sir, I will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast
a week with bran and water.
I had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
And Don Armado shall be your keeper.
My Lord Biron, see him deliverd oer:
And go we, lords, to put in practise that
Which each to other hath so strongly sworn.
Exeunt FERDINAND, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN
Ill lay my head to any good mans hat,
These oaths and laws will prove an idle scorn.
Sirrah, come on.
I suffer for the truth, sir; for true it is, I was
taken with Jaquenetta, and Jaquenetta is a true
girl; and therefore welcome the sour cup of
prosperity! Affliction may one day smile again; and
till then, sit thee down, sorrow!
Exeunt
LOVES LABOURS LOST
SCENE II. The same.
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO and MOTH
DON
Boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit
grows melancholy?
A great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
DON
Why, sadness is one and the self-same thing, dear imp.
No, no; O Lord, sir, no.
DON
How canst thou part sadness and melancholy, my
tender juvenal?
By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough senior.
DON
Why tough senior? why tough senior?
Why tender juvenal? why tender juvenal?
DON
I spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton
appertaining to thy young days, which we may
nominate tender.
And I, tough senior, as an appertinent title to your
old time, which we may name tough.
DON ADRIANO DE
Pretty and apt.
How mean you, sir? I pretty, and my saying apt? or
I apt, and my saying pretty?
DON
Thou pretty, because little.
Little pretty, because little. Wherefore apt?
DON
And therefore apt, because quick.
Speak you this in my praise, master?
DON
In thy condign praise.
I will praise an eel with the same praise.
DON
What, that an eel is ingenious?
That an eel is quick.
DON
I do say thou art quick in answers: thou heatest my blood.
I am answered, sir.
DON
I love not to be crossed.
[Aside]  He speaks the mere contrary; crosses love not him.
DON
I have promised to study three years with the duke.
You may do it in an hour, sir.
DON
Impossible.
How many is one thrice told?
DON
I am ill at reckoning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
You are a gentleman and a gamester, sir.
DON
I confess both: they are both the varnish of a
complete man.
Then, I am sure, you know how much the gross sum of
deuce-ace amounts to.
DON
It doth amount to one more than two.
Which the base vulgar do call three.
DON
True.
Why, sir, is this such a piece of study? Now here
is three studied, ere yell thrice wink: and how
easy it is to put years to the word three, and
study three years in two words, the dancing horse
will tell you.
DON
A most fine figure!
To prove you a cipher.
DON
I will hereupon confess I am in love: and as it is
base for a soldier to love, so am I in love with a
base wench. If drawing my sword against the humour
of affection would deliver me from the reprobate
thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and
ransom him to any French courtier for a new-devised
courtesy. I think scorn to sigh: methinks I should
outswear Cupid. Comfort, me, boy: what great men
have been in love?
Hercules, master.
DON
Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name
more; and, sweet my child, let them be men of good
repute and carriage.
Samson, master: he was a man of good carriage, great
carriage, for he carried the town-gates on his back
like a porter: and he was in love.
DON
O well-knit Samson! strong-jointed Samson! I do
excel thee in my rapier as much as thou didst me in
carrying gates. I am in love too. Who was Samsons
love, my dear Moth?
A woman, master.
DON
Of what complexion?
Of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.
DON
Tell me precisely of what complexion.
Of the sea-water green, sir.
DON
Is that one of the four complexions?
As I have read, sir; and the best of them too.
DON
Green indeed is the colour of lovers; but to have a
love of that colour, methinks Samson had small reason
for it. He surely affected her for her wit.
It was so, sir; for she had a green wit.
DON
My love is most immaculate white and red.
Most maculate thoughts, master, are masked under
such colours.
DON
Define, define, well-educated infant.
My fathers wit and my mothers tongue, assist me!
DON
Sweet invocation of a child; most pretty and
pathetical!
If she be made of white and red,
Her faults will neer be known,
For blushing cheeks by faults are bred
And fears by pale white shown:
Then if she fear, or be to blame,
By this you shall not know,
For still her cheeks possess the same
Which native she doth owe.
A dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of
white and red.
DON
Is there not a ballad, boy, of the King and the Beggar?
The world was very guilty of such a ballad some
three ages since: but I think now tis not to be
found; or, if it were, it would neither serve for
the writing nor the tune.
DON
I will have that subject newly writ oer, that I may
example my digression by some mighty precedent.
Boy, I do love that country girl that I took in the
park with the rational hind Costard: she deserves well.
[Aside]  To be whipped; and yet a better love than
my master.
DON
Sing, boy; my spirit grows heavy in love.
And thats great marvel, loving a light wench.
DON
I say, sing.
Forbear till this company be past.
Enter DULL, COSTARD, and JAQUENETTA
Sir, the dukes pleasure is, that you keep Costard
safe: and you must suffer him to take no delight
nor no penance; but a must fast three days a week.
For this damsel, I must keep her at the park: she
is allowed for the day-woman. Fare you well.
DON
I do betray myself with blushing. Maid!
Man?
DON
I will visit thee at the lodge.
Thats hereby.
DON
I know where it is situate.
Lord, how wise you are!
DON
I will tell thee wonders.
With that face?
DON
I love thee.
So I heard you say.
DON
And so, farewell.
Fair weather after you!
Come, Jaquenetta, away!
Exeunt DULL and JAQUENETTA
DON
Villain, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou
be pardoned.
Well, sir, I hope, when I do it, I shall do it on a
full stomach.
DON
Thou shalt be heavily punished.
I am more bound to you than your fellows, for they
are but lightly rewarded.
DON
Take away this villain; shut him up.
Come, you transgressing slave; away!
Let me not be pent up, sir: I will fast, being loose.
No, sir; that were fast and loose: thou shalt to prison.
Well, if ever I do see the merry days of desolation
that I have seen, some shall see.
What shall some see?
Nay, nothing, Master Moth, but what they look upon.
It is not for prisoners to be too silent in their
words; and therefore I will say nothing: I thank
God I have as little patience as another man; and
therefore I can be quiet.
Exeunt MOTH and COSTARD
DON
I do affect the very ground, which is base, where
her shoe, which is baser, guided by her foot, which
is basest, doth tread. I shall be forsworn, which
is a great argument of falsehood, if I love. And
how can that be true love which is falsely
attempted? Love is a familiar; Love is a devil:
there is no evil angel but Love. Yet was Samson so
tempted, and he had an excellent strength; yet was
Solomon so seduced, and he had a very good wit.
Cupids butt-shaft is too hard for Hercules club;
and therefore too much odds for a Spaniards rapier.
The first and second cause will not serve my turn;
the passado he respects not, the duello he regards
not: his disgrace is to be called boy; but his
glory is to subdue men. Adieu, valour! rust rapier!
be still, drum! for your manager is in love; yea,
he loveth. Assist me, some extemporal god of rhyme,
for I am sure I shall turn sonnet. Devise, wit;
write, pen; for I am for whole volumes in folio.
Exit
LOVES LABOURS LOST
ACT II
SCENE I. The same.
Enter the PRINCESS of France, ROSALINE, MARIA, KATHARINE, BOYET, Lords, and other Attendants
Now, madam, summon up your dearest spirits:
Consider who the king your father sends,
To whom he sends, and whats his embassy:
Yourself, held precious in the worlds esteem,
To parley with the sole inheritor
Of all perfections that a man may owe,
Matchless Navarre; the plea of no less weight
Than Aquitaine, a dowry for a queen.
Be now as prodigal of all dear grace
As Nature was in making graces dear
When she did starve the general world beside
And prodigally gave them all to you.
Good Lord Boyet, my beauty, though but mean,
Needs not the painted flourish of your praise:
Beauty is bought by judgement of the eye,
Not utterd by base sale of chapmens tongues:
I am less proud to hear you tell my worth
Than you much willing to be counted wise
In spending your wit in the praise of mine.
But now to task the tasker: good Boyet,
You are not ignorant, all-telling fame
Doth noise abroad, Navarre hath made a vow,
Till painful study shall outwear three years,
No woman may approach his silent court:
Therefore tos seemeth it a needful course,
Before we enter his forbidden gates,
To know his pleasure; and in that behalf,
Bold of your worthiness, we single you
As our best-moving fair solicitor.
Tell him, the daughter of the King of France,
On serious business, craving quick dispatch,
Importunes personal conference with his grace:
Haste, signify so much; while we attend,
Like humble-visaged suitors, his high will.
Proud of employment, willingly I go.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so.
Exit BOYET
Who are the votaries, my loving lords,
That are vow-fellows with this virtuous duke?
Lord Longaville is one.
Know you the man?
I know him, madam: at a marriage-feast,
Between Lord Perigort and the beauteous heir
Of Jaques Falconbridge, solemnized
In Normandy, saw I this Longaville:
A man of sovereign parts he is esteemd;
Well fitted in arts, glorious in arms:
Nothing becomes him ill that he would well.
The only soil of his fair virtues gloss,
If virtues gloss will stain with any soil,
Is a sharp wit matched with too blunt a will;
Whose edge hath power to cut, whose will still wills
It should none spare that come within his power.
Some merry mocking lord, belike; ist so?
They say so most that most his humours know.
Such short-lived wits do wither as they grow.
Who are the rest?
The young Dumain, a well-accomplished youth,
Of all that virtue love for virtue loved:
Most power to do most harm, least knowing ill;
For he hath wit to make an ill shape good,
And shape to win grace though he had no wit.
I saw him at the Duke Alencons once;
And much too little of that good I saw
Is my report to his great worthiness.
Another of these students at that time
Was there with him, if I have heard a truth.
Biron they call him; but a merrier man,
Within the limit of becoming mirth,
I never spent an hours talk withal:
His eye begets occasion for his wit;
For every object that the one doth catch
The other turns to a mirth-moving jest,
Which his fair tongue, conceits expositor,
Delivers in such apt and gracious words
That aged ears play truant at his tales
And younger hearings are quite ravished;
So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
God bless my ladies! are they all in love,
That every one her own hath garnished
With such bedecking ornaments of praise?
Here comes Boyet.
Re-enter BOYET
Now, what admittance, lord?
Navarre had notice of your fair approach;
And he and his competitors in oath
Were all addressd to meet you, gentle lady,
Before I came. Marry, thus much I have learnt:
He rather means to lodge you in the field,
Like one that comes here to besiege his court,
Than seek a dispensation for his oath,
To let you enter his unpeopled house.
Here comes Navarre.
Enter FERDINAND, LONGAVILLE, DUMAIN, BIRON, and Attendants
Fair princess, welcome to the court of Navarre.
Fair I give you back again; and welcome I have
not yet: the roof of this court is too high to be
yours; and welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
You shall be welcome, madam, to my court.
I will be welcome, then: conduct me thither.
Hear me, dear lady; I have sworn an oath.
Our Lady help my lord! hell be forsworn.
Not for the world, fair madam, by my will.
Why, will shall break it; will and nothing else.
Your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
Were my lord so, his ignorance were wise,
Where now his knowledge must prove ignorance.
I hear your grace hath sworn out house-keeping:
Tis deadly sin to keep that oath, my lord,
And sin to break it.
But pardon me. I am too sudden-bold:
To teach a teacher ill beseemeth me.
Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my coming,
And suddenly resolve me in my suit.
Madam, I will, if suddenly I may.
You will the sooner, that I were away;
For youll prove perjured if you make me stay.
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
Did not I dance with you in Brabant once?
I know you did.
How needless was it then to ask the question!
You must not be so quick.
Tis long of you that spur me with such questions.
Your wits too hot, it speeds too fast, twill tire.
Not till it leave the rider in the mire.
What time o day?
The hour that fools should ask.
Now fair befall your mask!
Fair fall the face it covers!
And send you many lovers!
Amen, so you be none.
Nay, then will I be gone.
Madam, your father here doth intimate
The payment of a hundred thousand crowns;
Being but the one half of an entire sum
Disbursed by my father in his wars.
But say that he or we, as neither have,
Received that sum, yet there remains unpaid
A hundred thousand more; in surety of the which,
One part of Aquitaine is bound to us,
Although not valued to the moneys worth.
If then the king your father will restore
But that one half which is unsatisfied,
We will give up our right in Aquitaine,
And hold fair friendship with his majesty.
But that, it seems, he little purposeth,
For here he doth demand to have repaid
A hundred thousand crowns; and not demands,
On payment of a hundred thousand crowns,
To have his title live in Aquitaine;
Which we much rather had depart withal
And have the money by our father lent
Than Aquitaine so gelded as it is.
Dear Princess, were not his requests so far
From reasons yielding, your fair self should make
A yielding gainst some reason in my breast
And go well satisfied to France again.
You do the king my father too much wrong
And wrong the reputation of your name,
In so unseeming to confess receipt
Of that which hath so faithfully been paid.
I do protest I never heard of it;
And if you prove it, Ill repay it back
Or yield up Aquitaine.
We arrest your word.
Boyet, you can produce acquittances
For such a sum from special officers
Of Charles his father.
Satisfy me so.
So please your grace, the packet is not come
Where that and other specialties are bound:
To-morrow you shall have a sight of them.
It shall suffice me: at which interview
All liberal reason I will yield unto.
Meantime receive such welcome at my hand
As honour without breach of honour may
Make tender of to thy true worthiness:
You may not come, fair princess, in my gates;
But here without you shall be so received
As you shall deem yourself lodged in my heart,
Though so denied fair harbour in my house.
Your own good thoughts excuse me, and farewell:
To-morrow shall we visit you again.
Sweet health and fair desires consort your grace!
Thy own wish wish I thee in every place!
Exit
Lady, I will commend you to mine own heart.
Pray you, do my commendations; I would be glad to see it.
I would you heard it groan.
Is the fool sick?
Sick at the heart.
Alack, let it blood.
Would that do it good?
My physic says ay.
Will you prickt with your eye?
No point, with my knife.
Now, God save thy life!
And yours from long living!
I cannot stay thanksgiving.
Retiring
Sir, I pray you, a word: what lady is that same?
The heir of Alencon, Katharine her name.
A gallant lady. Monsieur, fare you well.
Exit
I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
A woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
Perchance light in the light. I desire her name.
She hath but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.
Pray you, sir, whose daughter?
Her mothers, I have heard.
Gods blessing on your beard!
Good sir, be not offended.
She is an heir of Falconbridge.
Nay, my choler is ended.
She is a most sweet lady.
Not unlike, sir, that may be.
Exit LONGAVILLE
Whats her name in the cap?
Rosaline, by good hap.
Is she wedded or no?
To her will, sir, or so.
You are welcome, sir: adieu.
Farewell to me, sir, and welcome to you.
Exit BIRON
That last is Biron, the merry madcap lord:
Not a word with him but a jest.
And every jest but a word.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.
I was as willing to grapple as he was to board.
Two hot sheeps, marry.
And wherefore not ships?
No sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
You sheep, and I pasture: shall that finish the jest?
So you grant pasture for me.
Offering to kiss her
Not so, gentle beast:
My lips are no common, though several they be.
Belonging to whom?
To my fortunes and me.
Good wits will be jangling; but, gentles, agree:
This civil war of wits were much better used
On Navarre and his book-men; for here tis abused.
If my observation, which very seldom lies,
By the hearts still rhetoric disclosed with eyes,
Deceive me not now, Navarre is infected.
With what?
With that which we lovers entitle affected.
Your reason?
Why, all his behaviors did make their retire
To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire:
His heart, like an agate, with your print impressd,
Proud with his form, in his eye pride expressd:
His tongue, all impatient to speak and not see,
Did stumble with haste in his eyesight to be;
All senses to that sense did make their repair,
To feel only looking on fairest of fair:
Methought all his senses were lockd in his eye,
As jewels in crystal for some prince to buy;
Who, tendering their own worth from where they were glassd,
Did point you to buy them, along as you passd:
His faces own margent did quote such amazes
That all eyes saw his eyes enchanted with gazes.
Ill give you Aquitaine and all that is his,
An you give him for my sake but one loving kiss.
Come to our pavilion: Boyet is disposed.
But to speak that in words which his eye hath
disclosed.
I only have made a mouth of his eye,
By adding a tongue which I know will not lie.
Thou art an old love-monger and speakest skilfully.
He is Cupids grandfather and learns news of him.
Then was Venus like her mother, for her father is but grim.
Do you hear, my mad wenches?
No.
What then, do you see?
Ay, our way to be gone.
You are too hard for me.
Exeunt
LOVES LABOURS LOST
ACT III
SCENE I. The same.
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO and MOTH
DON
Warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.
Concolinel.
Singing
DON
Sweet air! Go, tenderness of years; take this key,
give enlargement to the swain, bring him festinately
hither: I must employ him in a letter to my love.
Master, will you win your love with a French brawl?
DON
How meanest thou? brawling in French?
No, my complete master: but to jig off a tune at
the tongues end, canary to it with your feet, humour
it with turning up your eyelids, sigh a note and
sing a note, sometime through the throat, as if you
swallowed love with singing love, sometime through
the nose, as if you snuffed up love by smelling
love; with your hat penthouse-like oer the shop of
your eyes; with your arms crossed on your thin-belly
doublet like a rabbit on a spit; or your hands in
your pocket like a man after the old painting; and
keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away.
These are complements, these are humours; these
betray nice wenches, that would be betrayed without
these; and make them men of note--do you note
me?--that most are affected to these.
DON
How hast thou purchased this experience?
By my penny of observation.
DON
But O,--but O,--
The hobby-horse is forgot.
DON
Callest thou my love hobby-horse?
No, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your
love perhaps a hackney. But have you forgot your love?
DON
Almost I had.
Negligent student! learn her by heart.
DON
By heart and in heart, boy.
And out of heart, master: all those three I will prove.
DON
What wilt thou prove?
A man, if I live; and this, by, in, and without, upon
the instant: by heart you love her, because your
heart cannot come by her; in heart you love her,
because your heart is in love with her; and out of
heart you love her, being out of heart that you
cannot enjoy her.
DON
I am all these three.
And three times as much more, and yet nothing at
all.
DON
Fetch hither the swain: he must carry me a letter.
A message well sympathized; a horse to be ambassador
for an ass.
DON
Ha, ha! what sayest thou?
Marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse,
for he is very slow-gaited. But I go.
DON
The way is but short: away!
As swift as lead, sir.
DON
The meaning, pretty ingenious?
Is not lead a metal heavy, dull, and slow?
Minime, honest master; or rather, master, no.
DON
I say lead is slow.
You are too swift, sir, to say so:
Is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
DON
Sweet smoke of rhetoric!
He reputes me a cannon; and the bullet, thats he:
I shoot thee at the swain.
Thump then and I flee.
Exit
DON
A most acute juvenal; voluble and free of grace!
By thy favour, sweet welkin, I must sigh in thy face:
Most rude melancholy, valour gives thee place.
My herald is returnd.
Re-enter MOTH with COSTARD
A wonder, master! heres a costard broken in a shin.
DON
Some enigma, some riddle: come, thy lenvoy; begin.
No enigma, no riddle, no lenvoy; no salve in the
mail, sir: O, sir, plantain, a plain plantain! no
lenvoy, no lenvoy; no salve, sir, but a plantain!
DON
By virtue, thou enforcest laughter; thy silly
thought my spleen; the heaving of my lungs provokes
me to ridiculous smiling. O, pardon me, my stars!
Doth the inconsiderate take salve for lenvoy, and
the word lenvoy for a salve?
Do the wise think them other? is not lenvoy a salve?
DON
No, page: it is an epilogue or discourse, to make plain
Some obscure precedence that hath tofore been sain.
I will example it:
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Theres the moral. Now the lenvoy.
I will add the lenvoy. Say the moral again.
DON
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
Until the goose came out of door,
And stayd the odds by adding four.
Now will I begin your moral, and do you follow with
my lenvoy.
The fox, the ape, and the humble-bee,
Were still at odds, being but three.
DON
Until the goose came out of door,
Staying the odds by adding four.
A good lenvoy, ending in the goose: would you
desire more?
The boy hath sold him a bargain, a goose, thats flat.
Sir, your pennyworth is good, an your goose be fat.
To sell a bargain well is as cunning as fast and loose:
Let me see; a fat lenvoy; ay, thats a fat goose.
DON
Come hither, come hither. How did this argument begin?
By saying that a costard was broken in a shin.
Then calld you for the lenvoy.
True, and I for a plantain: thus came your
argument in;
Then the boys fat lenvoy, the goose that you bought;
And he ended the market.
DON
But tell me; how was there a costard broken in a shin?
I will tell you sensibly.
Thou hast no feeling of it, Moth: I will speak that lenvoy:
I Costard, running out, that was safely within,
Fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
DON
We will talk no more of this matter.
Till there be more matter in the shin.
DON
Sirrah Costard, I will enfranchise thee.
O, marry me to one Frances: I smell some lenvoy,
some goose, in this.
DON
By my sweet soul, I mean setting thee at liberty,
enfreedoming thy person; thou wert immured,
restrained, captivated, bound.
True, true; and now you will be my purgation and let me loose.
DON
I give thee thy liberty, set thee from durance; and,
in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this:
bear this significant
Giving a letter
to the country maid Jaquenetta:
there is remuneration; for the best ward of mine
honour is rewarding my dependents. Moth, follow.
Exit
Like the sequel, I. Signior Costard, adieu.
My sweet ounce of mans flesh! my incony Jew!
Exit MOTH
Now will I look to his remuneration. Remuneration!
O, thats the Latin word for three farthings: three
farthings--remuneration.--Whats the price of this
inkle?--One penny.--No, Ill give you a
remuneration: why, it carries it. Remuneration!
why, it is a fairer name than French crown. I will
never buy and sell out of this word.
Enter BIRON
O, my good knave Costard! exceedingly well met.
Pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man
buy for a remuneration?
What is a remuneration?
Marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
Why, then, three-farthing worth of silk.
I thank your worship: God be wi you!
Stay, slave; I must employ thee:
As thou wilt win my favour, good my knave,
Do one thing for me that I shall entreat.
When would you have it done, sir?
This afternoon.
Well, I will do it, sir: fare you well.
Thou knowest not what it is.
I shall know, sir, when I have done it.
Why, villain, thou must know first.
I will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
It must be done this afternoon.
Hark, slave, it is but this:
The princess comes to hunt here in the park,
And in her train there is a gentle lady;
When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name,
And Rosaline they call her: ask for her;
And to her white hand see thou do commend
This seald-up counsel. Theres thy guerdon; go.
Giving him a shilling
Gardon, O sweet gardon! better than remuneration,
aleven-pence farthing better: most sweet gardon! I
will do it sir, in print. Gardon! Remuneration!
Exit
And I, forsooth, in love! I, that have been loves whip;
A very beadle to a humorous sigh;
A critic, nay, a night-watch constable;
A domineering pedant oer the boy;
Than whom no mortal so magnificent!
This whimpled, whining, purblind, wayward boy;
This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan Cupid;
Regent of love-rhymes, lord of folded arms,
The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans,
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents,
Dread prince of plackets, king of codpieces,
Sole imperator and great general
Of trotting paritors:--O my little heart:--
And I to be a corporal of his field,
And wear his colours like a tumblers hoop!
What, I! I love! I sue! I seek a wife!
A woman, that is like a German clock,
Still a-repairing, ever out of frame,
And never going aright, being a watch,
But being watchd that it may still go right!
Nay, to be perjured, which is worst of all;
And, among three, to love the worst of all;
A wightly wanton with a velvet brow,
With two pitch-balls stuck in her face for eyes;
Ay, and by heaven, one that will do the deed
Though Argus were her eunuch and her guard:
And I to sigh for her! to watch for her!
To pray for her! Go to; it is a plague
That Cupid will impose for my neglect
Of his almighty dreadful little might.
Well, I will love, write, sigh, pray, sue and groan:
Some men must love my lady and some Joan.
Exit
LOVES LABOURS LOST
ACT IV
SCENE I. The same.
Enter the PRINCESS, and her train, a Forester, BOYET, ROSALINE, MARIA, and KATHARINE
Was that the king, that spurred his horse so hard
Against the steep uprising of the hill?
I know not; but I think it was not he.
Whoeer a was, a showd a mounting mind.
Well, lords, to-day we shall have our dispatch:
On Saturday we will return to France.
Then, forester, my friend, where is the bush
That we must stand and play the murderer in?
Hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice;
A stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
I thank my beauty, I am fair that shoot,
And thereupon thou speakst the fairest shoot.
Pardon me, madam, for I meant not so.
What, what? first praise me and again say no?
O short-lived pride! Not fair? alack for woe!
Yes, madam, fair.
Nay, never paint me now:
Where fair is not, praise cannot mend the brow.
Here, good my glass, take this for telling true:
Fair payment for foul words is more than due.
Nothing but fair is that which you inherit.
See see, my beauty will be saved by merit!
O heresy in fair, fit for these days!
A giving hand, though foul, shall have fair praise.
But come, the bow: now mercy goes to kill,
And shooting well is then accounted ill.
Thus will I save my credit in the shoot:
Not wounding, pity would not let me dot;
If wounding, then it was to show my skill,
That more for praise than purpose meant to kill.
And out of question so it is sometimes,
Glory grows guilty of detested crimes,
When, for fames sake, for praise, an outward part,
We bend to that the working of the heart;
As I for praise alone now seek to spill
The poor deers blood, that my heart means no ill.
Do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty
Only for praise sake, when they strive to be
Lords oer their lords?
Only for praise: and praise we may afford
To any lady that subdues a lord.
Here comes a member of the commonwealth.
Enter COSTARD
God dig-you-den all! Pray you, which is the head lady?
Thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have no heads.
Which is the greatest lady, the highest?
The thickest and the tallest.
The thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is truth.
An your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit,
One o these maids girdles for your waist should be fit.
Are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
Whats your will, sir? whats your will?
I have a letter from Monsieur Biron to one Lady Rosaline.
O, thy letter, thy letter! hes a good friend of mine:
Stand aside, good bearer. Boyet, you can carve;
Break up this capon.
I am bound to serve.
This letter is mistook, it importeth none here;
It is writ to Jaquenetta.
We will read it, I swear.
Break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
Reads
By heaven, that thou art fair, is most infallible;
true, that thou art beauteous; truth itself, that
thou art lovely. More fairer than fair, beautiful
than beauteous, truer than truth itself, have
commiseration on thy heroical vassal! The
magnanimous and most illustrate king Cophetua set
eye upon the pernicious and indubitate beggar
Zenelophon; and he it was that might rightly say,
Veni, vidi, vici; which to annothanize in the
vulgar,--O base and obscure vulgar!--videlicet, He
came, saw, and overcame: he came, one; saw two;
overcame, three. Who came? the king: why did he
come? to see: why did he see? to overcome: to
whom came he? to the beggar: what saw he? the
beggar: who overcame he? the beggar. The
conclusion is victory: on whose side? the kings.
The captive is enriched: on whose side? the
beggars. The catastrophe is a nuptial: on whose
side? the kings: no, on both in one, or one in
both. I am the king; for so stands the comparison:
thou the beggar; for so witnesseth thy lowliness.
Shall I command thy love? I may: shall I enforce
thy love? I could: shall I entreat thy love? I
will. What shalt thou exchange for rags? robes;
for tittles? titles; for thyself? me. Thus,
expecting thy reply, I profane my lips on thy foot,
my eyes on thy picture. and my heart on thy every
part. Thine, in the dearest design of industry,
DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO.
Thus dost thou hear the Nemean lion roar
Gainst thee, thou lamb, that standest as his prey.
Submissive fall his princely feet before,
And he from forage will incline to play:
But if thou strive, poor soul, what art thou then?
Food for his rage, repasture for his den.
What plume of feathers is he that indited this letter?
What vane? what weathercock? did you ever hear better?
I am much deceived but I remember the style.
Else your memory is bad, going oer it erewhile.
This Armado is a Spaniard, that keeps here in court;
A phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport
To the prince and his bookmates.
Thou fellow, a word:
Who gave thee this letter?
I told you; my lord.
To whom shouldst thou give it?
From my lord to my lady.
From which lord to which lady?
From my lord Biron, a good master of mine,
To a lady of France that he calld Rosaline.
Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come, lords, away.
To ROSALINE
Here, sweet, put up this: twill be thine another day.
Exeunt PRINCESS and train
Who is the suitor? who is the suitor?
Shall I teach you to know?
Ay, my continent of beauty.
Why, she that bears the bow.
Finely put off!
My lady goes to kill horns; but, if thou marry,
Hang me by the neck, if horns that year miscarry.
Finely put on!
Well, then, I am the shooter.
And who is your deer?
If we choose by the horns, yourself come not near.
Finely put on, indeed!
You still wrangle with her, Boyet, and she strikes
at the brow.
But she herself is hit lower: have I hit her now?
Shall I come upon thee with an old saying, that was
a man when King Pepin of France was a little boy, as
touching the hit it?
So I may answer thee with one as old, that was a
woman when Queen Guinover of Britain was a little
wench, as touching the hit it.
Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it,
Thou canst not hit it, my good man.
An I cannot, cannot, cannot,
An I cannot, another can.
Exeunt ROSALINE and KATHARINE
By my troth, most pleasant: how both did fit it!
A mark marvellous well shot, for they both did hit it.
A mark! O, mark but that mark! A mark, says my lady!
Let the mark have a prick int, to mete at, if it may be.
Wide o the bow hand! i faith, your hand is out.
Indeed, a must shoot nearer, or hell neer hit the clout.
An if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
Then will she get the upshoot by cleaving the pin.
Come, come, you talk greasily; your lips grow foul.
Shes too hard for you at pricks, sir: challenge her to bowl.
I fear too much rubbing. Good night, my good owl.
Exeunt BOYET and MARIA
By my soul, a swain! a most simple clown!
Lord, Lord, how the ladies and I have put him down!
