O my troth, most sweet jests! most incony
vulgar wit!
When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it
were, so fit.
Armado o th one side,--O, a most dainty man!
To see him walk before a lady and to bear her fan!
To see him kiss his hand! and how most sweetly a
will swear!
And his page o t other side, that handful of wit!
Ah, heavens, it is a most pathetical nit!
Sola, sola!
Shout within
Exit COSTARD, running
LOVES LABOURS LOST
SCENE II. The same.
Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL
Very reverend sport, truly; and done in the testimony
of a good conscience.
The deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe
as the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in
the ear of caelo, the sky, the welkin, the heaven;
and anon falleth like a crab on the face of terra,
the soil, the land, the earth.
Truly, Master Holofernes, the epithets are sweetly
varied, like a scholar at the least: but, sir, I
assure ye, it was a buck of the first head.
Sir Nathaniel, haud credo.
Twas not a haud credo; twas a pricket.
Most barbarous intimation! yet a kind of
insinuation, as it were, in via, in way, of
explication; facere, as it were, replication, or
rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his
inclination, after his undressed, unpolished,
uneducated, unpruned, untrained, or rather,
unlettered, or ratherest, unconfirmed fashion, to
insert again my haud credo for a deer.
I said the deer was not a haud credo; twas a pricket.
Twice-sod simplicity, his coctus!
O thou monster Ignorance, how deformed dost thou look!
Sir, he hath never fed of the dainties that are bred
in a book; he hath not eat paper, as it were; he
hath not drunk ink: his intellect is not
replenished; he is only an animal, only sensible in
the duller parts:
And such barren plants are set before us, that we
thankful should be,
Which we of taste and feeling are, for those parts that
do fructify in us more than he.
For as it would ill become me to be vain, indiscreet, or a fool,
So were there a patch set on learning, to see him in a school:
But omne bene, say I; being of an old fathers mind,
Many can brook the weather that love not the wind.
You two are book-men: can you tell me by your wit
What was a month old at Cains birth, thats not five
weeks old as yet?
Dictynna, goodman Dull; Dictynna, goodman Dull.
What is Dictynna?
A title to Phoebe, to Luna, to the moon.
The moon was a month old when Adam was no more,
And raught not to five weeks when he came to
five-score.
The allusion holds in the exchange.
Tis true indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.
God comfort thy capacity! I say, the allusion holds
in the exchange.
And I say, the pollusion holds in the exchange; for
the moon is never but a month old: and I say beside
that, twas a pricket that the princess killed.
Sir Nathaniel, will you hear an extemporal epitaph
on the death of the deer? And, to humour the
ignorant, call I the deer the princess killed a pricket.
Perge, good Master Holofernes, perge; so it shall
please you to abrogate scurrility.
I will something affect the letter, for it argues facility.
The preyful princess pierced and prickd a pretty
pleasing pricket;
Some say a sore; but not a sore, till now made
sore with shooting.
The dogs did yell: put L to sore, then sorel jumps
from thicket;
Or pricket sore, or else sorel; the people fall a-hooting.
If sore be sore, then L to sore makes fifty sores
one sorel.
Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.
A rare talent!
[Aside]  If a talent be a claw, look how he claws
him with a talent.
This is a gift that I have, simple, simple; a
foolish extravagant spirit, full of forms, figures,
shapes, objects, ideas, apprehensions, motions,
revolutions: these are begot in the ventricle of
memory, nourished in the womb of pia mater, and
delivered upon the mellowing of occasion. But the
gift is good in those in whom it is acute, and I am
thankful for it.
Sir, I praise the Lord for you; and so may my
parishioners; for their sons are well tutored by
you, and their daughters profit very greatly under
you: you are a good member of the commonwealth.
Mehercle, if their sons be ingenuous, they shall
want no instruction; if their daughters be capable,
I will put it to them: but vir sapit qui pauca
loquitur; a soul feminine saluteth us.
Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD
God give you good morrow, master Parson.
Master Parson, quasi pers-on. An if one should be
pierced, which is the one?
Marry, master schoolmaster, he that is likest to a hogshead.
Piercing a hogshead! a good lustre of conceit in a
tuft of earth; fire enough for a flint, pearl enough
for a swine: tis pretty; it is well.
Good master Parson, be so good as read me this
letter: it was given me by Costard, and sent me
from Don Armado: I beseech you, read it.
Fauste, precor gelida quando pecus omne sub umbra
Ruminat,--and so forth. Ah, good old Mantuan! I
may speak of thee as the traveller doth of Venice;
Venetia, Venetia,
Chi non ti vede non ti pretia.
Old Mantuan, old Mantuan! who understandeth thee
not, loves thee not. Ut, re, sol, la, mi, fa.
Under pardon, sir, what are the contents? or rather,
as Horace says in his--What, my soul, verses?
Ay, sir, and very learned.
Let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse; lege, domine.
[Reads]
If love make me forsworn, how shall I swear to love?
Ah, never faith could hold, if not to beauty vowd!
Though to myself forsworn, to thee Ill faithful prove:
Those thoughts to me were oaks, to thee like
osiers bowd.
Study his bias leaves and makes his book thine eyes,
Where all those pleasures live that art would
comprehend:
If knowledge be the mark, to know thee shall suffice;
Well learned is that tongue that well can thee commend,
All ignorant that soul that sees thee without wonder;
Which is to me some praise that I thy parts admire:
Thy eye Joves lightning bears, thy voice his dreadful thunder,
Which not to anger bent, is music and sweet fire.
Celestial as thou art, O, pardon, love, this wrong,
That sings heavens praise with such an earthly tongue.
You find not the apostraphas, and so miss the
accent: let me supervise the canzonet. Here are
only numbers ratified; but, for the elegancy,
facility, and golden cadence of poesy, caret.
Ovidius Naso was the man: and why, indeed, Naso,
but for smelling out the odouriferous flowers of
fancy, the jerks of invention? Imitari is nothing:
so doth the hound his master, the ape his keeper,
the tired horse his rider. But, damosella virgin,
was this directed to you?
Ay, sir, from one Monsieur Biron, one of the strange
queens lords.
I will overglance the superscript: To the
snow-white hand of the most beauteous Lady
Rosaline. I will look again on the intellect of
the letter, for the nomination of the party writing
to the person written unto: Your ladyships in all
desired employment, BIRON. Sir Nathaniel, this
Biron is one of the votaries with the king; and here
he hath framed a letter to a sequent of the stranger
queens, which accidentally, or by the way of
progression, hath miscarried. Trip and go, my
sweet; deliver this paper into the royal hand of the
king: it may concern much. Stay not thy
compliment; I forgive thy duty; adieu.
Good Costard, go with me. Sir, God save your life!
Have with thee, my girl.
Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
Sir, you have done this in the fear of God, very
religiously; and, as a certain father saith,--
Sir tell me not of the father; I do fear colourable
colours. But to return to the verses: did they
please you, Sir Nathaniel?
Marvellous well for the pen.
I do dine to-day at the fathers of a certain pupil
of mine; where, if, before repast, it shall please
you to gratify the table with a grace, I will, on my
privilege I have with the parents of the foresaid
child or pupil, undertake your ben venuto; where I
will prove those verses to be very unlearned,
neither savouring of poetry, wit, nor invention: I
beseech your society.
And thank you too; for society, saith the text, is
the happiness of life.
And, certes, the text most infallibly concludes it.
To DULL
Sir, I do invite you too; you shall not
say me nay: pauca verba. Away! the gentles are at
their game, and we will to our recreation.
Exeunt
LOVES LABOURS LOST
SCENE III. The same.
Enter BIRON, with a paper
The king he is hunting the deer; I am coursing
myself: they have pitched a toil; I am toiling in
a pitch,--pitch that defiles: defile! a foul
word. Well, set thee down, sorrow! for so they say
the fool said, and so say I, and I the fool: well
proved, wit! By the Lord, this love is as mad as
Ajax: it kills sheep; it kills me, I a sheep:
well proved again o my side! I will not love: if
I do, hang me; i faith, I will not. O, but her
eye,--by this light, but for her eye, I would not
love her; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I do nothing
in the world but lie, and lie in my throat. By
heaven, I do love: and it hath taught me to rhyme
and to be melancholy; and here is part of my rhyme,
and here my melancholy. Well, she hath one o my
sonnets already: the clown bore it, the fool sent
it, and the lady hath it: sweet clown, sweeter
fool, sweetest lady! By the world, I would not care
a pin, if the other three were in. Here comes one
with a paper: God give him grace to groan!
Stands aside
Enter FERDINAND, with a paper
Ay me!
[Aside]  Shot, by heaven! Proceed, sweet Cupid:
thou hast thumped him with thy bird-bolt under the
left pap. In faith, secrets!
[Reads]
So sweet a kiss the golden sun gives not
To those fresh morning drops upon the rose,
As thy eye-beams, when their fresh rays have smote
The night of dew that on my cheeks down flows:
Nor shines the silver moon one half so bright
Through the transparent bosom of the deep,
As doth thy face through tears of mine give light;
Thou shinest in every tear that I do weep:
No drop but as a coach doth carry thee;
So ridest thou triumphing in my woe.
Do but behold the tears that swell in me,
And they thy glory through my grief will show:
But do not love thyself; then thou wilt keep
My tears for glasses, and still make me weep.
O queen of queens! how far dost thou excel,
No thought can think, nor tongue of mortal tell.
How shall she know my griefs? Ill drop the paper:
Sweet leaves, shade folly. Who is he comes here?
Steps aside
What, Longaville! and reading! listen, ear.
Now, in thy likeness, one more fool appear!
Enter LONGAVILLE, with a paper
Ay me, I am forsworn!
Why, he comes in like a perjure, wearing papers.
In love, I hope: sweet fellowship in shame!
One drunkard loves another of the name.
Am I the first that have been perjured so?
I could put thee in comfort. Not by two that I know:
Thou makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society,
The shape of Loves Tyburn that hangs up simplicity.
I fear these stubborn lines lack power to move:
O sweet Maria, empress of my love!
These numbers will I tear, and write in prose.
O, rhymes are guards on wanton Cupids hose:
Disfigure not his slop.
This same shall go.
Reads
Did not the heavenly rhetoric of thine eye,
Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument,
Persuade my heart to this false perjury?
Vows for thee broke deserve not punishment.
A woman I forswore; but I will prove,
Thou being a goddess, I forswore not thee:
My vow was earthly, thou a heavenly love;
Thy grace being gaind cures all disgrace in me.
Vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is:
Then thou, fair sun, which on my earth dost shine,
Exhalest this vapour-vow; in thee it is:
If broken then, it is no fault of mine:
If by me broke, what fool is not so wise
To lose an oath to win a paradise?
This is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity,
A green goose a goddess: pure, pure idolatry.
God amend us, God amend! we are much out o the way.
By whom shall I send this?--Company! stay.
Steps aside
All hid, all hid; an old infant play.
Like a demigod here sit I in the sky.
And wretched fools secrets heedfully oereye.
More sacks to the mill! O heavens, I have my wish!
Enter DUMAIN, with a paper
Dumain transformd! four woodcocks in a dish!
O most divine Kate!
O most profane coxcomb!
By heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
By earth, she is not, corporal, there you lie.
Her amber hair for foul hath amber quoted.
An amber-colourd raven was well noted.
As upright as the cedar.
Stoop, I say;
Her shoulder is with child.
As fair as day.
Ay, as some days; but then no sun must shine.
O that I had my wish!
And I had mine!
And I mine too, good Lord!
Amen, so I had mine: is not that a good word?
I would forget her; but a fever she
Reigns in my blood and will rememberd be.
A fever in your blood! why, then incision
Would let her out in saucers: sweet misprision!
Once more Ill read the ode that I have writ.
Once more Ill mark how love can vary wit.
[Reads]
On a day--alack the day!--
Love, whose month is ever May,
Spied a blossom passing fair
Playing in the wanton air:
Through the velvet leaves the wind,
All unseen, can passage find;
That the lover, sick to death,
Wish himself the heavens breath.
Air, quoth he, thy cheeks may blow;
Air, would I might triumph so!
But, alack, my hand is sworn
Neer to pluck thee from thy thorn;
Vow, alack, for youth unmeet,
Youth so apt to pluck a sweet!
Do not call it sin in me,
That I am forsworn for thee;
Thou for whom Jove would swear
Juno but an Ethiope were;
And deny himself for Jove,
Turning mortal for thy love.
This will I send, and something else more plain,
That shall express my true loves fasting pain.
O, would the king, Biron, and Longaville,
Were lovers too! Ill, to example ill,
Would from my forehead wipe a perjured note;
For none offend where all alike do dote.
[Advancing]  Dumain, thy love is far from charity.
You may look pale, but I should blush, I know,
To be oerheard and taken napping so.
[Advancing]  Come, sir, you blush; as his your case is such;
You chide at him, offending twice as much;
You do not love Maria; Longaville
Did never sonnet for her sake compile,
Nor never lay his wreathed arms athwart
His loving bosom to keep down his heart.
I have been closely shrouded in this bush
And markd you both and for you both did blush:
I heard your guilty rhymes, observed your fashion,
Saw sighs reek from you, noted well your passion:
Ay me! says one; O Jove! the other cries;
One, her hairs were gold, crystal the others eyes:
To LONGAVILLE
You would for paradise break faith, and troth;
To DUMAIN
And Jove, for your love, would infringe an oath.
What will Biron say when that he shall hear
Faith so infringed, which such zeal did swear?
How will he scorn! how will he spend his wit!
How will he triumph, leap and laugh at it!
For all the wealth that ever I did see,
I would not have him know so much by me.
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisy.
Advancing
Ah, good my liege, I pray thee, pardon me!
Good heart, what grace hast thou, thus to reprove
These worms for loving, that art most in love?
Your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears
There is no certain princess that appears;
Youll not be perjured, tis a hateful thing;
Tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting!
But are you not ashamed? nay, are you not,
All three of you, to be thus much oershot?
You found his mote; the king your mote did see;
But I a beam do find in each of three.
O, what a scene of foolery have I seen,
Of sighs, of groans, of sorrow and of teen!
O me, with what strict patience have I sat,
To see a king transformed to a gnat!
To see great Hercules whipping a gig,
And profound Solomon to tune a jig,
And Nestor play at push-pin with the boys,
And critic Timon laugh at idle toys!
Where lies thy grief, O, tell me, good Dumain?
And gentle Longaville, where lies thy pain?
And where my lieges? all about the breast:
A caudle, ho!
Too bitter is thy jest.
Are we betrayd thus to thy over-view?
Not you to me, but I betrayd by you:
I, that am honest; I, that hold it sin
To break the vow I am engaged in;
I am betrayd, by keeping company
With men like men of inconstancy.
When shall you see me write a thing in rhyme?
Or groan for love? or spend a minutes time
In pruning me? When shall you hear that I
Will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye,
A gait, a state, a brow, a breast, a waist,
A leg, a limb?
Soft! whither away so fast?
A true man or a thief that gallops so?
I post from love: good lover, let me go.
Enter JAQUENETTA and COSTARD
God bless the king!
What present hast thou there?
Some certain treason.
What makes treason here?
Nay, it makes nothing, sir.
If it mar nothing neither,
The treason and you go in peace away together.
I beseech your grace, let this letter be read:
Our parson misdoubts it; twas treason, he said.
Biron, read it over.
Giving him the paper
Where hadst thou it?
Of Costard.
Where hadst thou it?
Of Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
BIRON tears the letter
How now! what is in you? why dost thou tear it?
A toy, my liege, a toy: your grace needs not fear it.
It did move him to passion, and therefore lets hear it.
It is Birons writing, and here is his name.
Gathering up the pieces
[To COSTARD]  Ah, you whoreson loggerhead! you were
born to do me shame.
Guilty, my lord, guilty! I confess, I confess.
What?
That you three fools lackd me fool to make up the mess:
He, he, and you, and you, my liege, and I,
Are pick-purses in love, and we deserve to die.
O, dismiss this audience, and I shall tell you more.
Now the number is even.
True, true; we are four.
Will these turtles be gone?
Hence, sirs; away!
Walk aside the true folk, and let the traitors stay.
Exeunt COSTARD and JAQUENETTA
Sweet lords, sweet lovers, O, let us embrace!
As true we are as flesh and blood can be:
The sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face;
Young blood doth not obey an old decree:
We cannot cross the cause why we were born;
Therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
What, did these rent lines show some love of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heavenly Rosaline,
That, like a rude and savage man of Inde,
At the first opening of the gorgeous east,
Bows not his vassal head and strucken blind
Kisses the base ground with obedient breast?
What peremptory eagle-sighted eye
Dares look upon the heaven of her brow,
That is not blinded by her majesty?
What zeal, what fury hath inspired thee now?
My love, her mistress, is a gracious moon;
She an attending star, scarce seen a light.
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I Biron:
O, but for my love, day would turn to night!
Of all complexions the culld sovereignty
Do meet, as at a fair, in her fair cheek,
Where several worthies make one dignity,
Where nothing wants that want itself doth seek.
Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues,--
Fie, painted rhetoric! O, she needs it not:
To things of sale a sellers praise belongs,
She passes praise; then praise too short doth blot.
A witherd hermit, five-score winters worn,
Might shake off fifty, looking in her eye:
Beauty doth varnish age, as if new-born,
And gives the crutch the cradles infancy:
O, tis the sun that maketh all things shine.
By heaven, thy love is black as ebony.
Is ebony like her? O wood divine!
A wife of such wood were felicity.
O, who can give an oath? where is a book?
That I may swear beauty doth beauty lack,
If that she learn not of her eye to look:
No face is fair that is not full so black.
O paradox! Black is the badge of hell,
The hue of dungeons and the suit of night;
And beautys crest becomes the heavens well.
Devils soonest tempt, resembling spirits of light.
O, if in black my ladys brows be deckd,
It mourns that painting and usurping hair
Should ravish doters with a false aspect;
And therefore is she born to make black fair.
Her favour turns the fashion of the days,
For native blood is counted painting now;
And therefore red, that would avoid dispraise,
Paints itself black, to imitate her brow.
To look like her are chimney-sweepers black.
And since her time are colliers counted bright.
And Ethiopes of their sweet complexion crack.
Dark needs no candles now, for dark is light.
Your mistresses dare never come in rain,
For fear their colours should be washd away.
Twere good, yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain,
Ill find a fairer face not washd to-day.
Ill prove her fair, or talk till doomsday here.
No devil will fright thee then so much as she.
I never knew man hold vile stuff so dear.
Look, heres thy love: my foot and her face see.
O, if the streets were paved with thine eyes,
Her feet were much too dainty for such tread!
O, vile! then, as she goes, what upward lies
The street should see as she walkd overhead.
But what of this? are we not all in love?
Nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.
Then leave this chat; and, good Biron, now prove
Our loving lawful, and our faith not torn.
Ay, marry, there; some flattery for this evil.
O, some authority how to proceed;
Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the devil.
Some salve for perjury.
Tis more than need.
Have at you, then, affections men at arms.
Consider what you first did swear unto,
To fast, to study, and to see no woman;
Flat treason gainst the kingly state of youth.
Say, can you fast? your stomachs are too young;
And abstinence engenders maladies.
And where that you have vowd to study, lords,
In that each of you have forsworn his book,
Can you still dream and pore and thereon look?
For when would you, my lord, or you, or you,
Have found the ground of studys excellence
Without the beauty of a womans face?
From womens eyes this doctrine I derive;  They are the ground, the books, the academes From whence doth spring the true Promethean fire
Why, universal plodding poisons up
The nimble spirits in the arteries,
As motion and long-during action tires
The sinewy vigour of the traveller.
Now, for not looking on a womans face,
You have in that forsworn the use of eyes
And study too, the causer of your vow;
For where is any author in the world
Teaches such beauty as a womans eye?
Learning is but an adjunct to ourself
And where we are our learning likewise is:
Then when ourselves we see in ladies eyes,
Do we not likewise see our learning there?
O, we have made a vow to study, lords,
And in that vow we have forsworn our books.
For when would you, my liege, or you, or you,
In leaden contemplation have found out
Such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes
Of beautys tutors have enrichd you with?
Other slow arts entirely keep the brain;
And therefore, finding barren practisers,
Scarce show a harvest of their heavy toil:
But love, first learned in a ladys eyes,
Lives not alone immured in the brain;
But, with the motion of all elements,
Courses as swift as thought in every power,
And gives to every power a double power,
Above their functions and their offices.
It adds a precious seeing to the eye;
A lovers eyes will gaze an eagle blind;
A lovers ear will hear the lowest sound,
When the suspicious head of theft is stoppd:
Loves feeling is more soft and sensible
Than are the tender horns of cockld snails;
Loves tongue proves dainty Bacchus gross in taste:
For valour, is not Love a Hercules,
Still climbing trees in the Hesperides?
Subtle as Sphinx; as sweet and musical
As bright Apollos lute, strung with his hair:
And when Love speaks, the voice of all the gods
Makes heaven drowsy with the harmony.
Never durst poet touch a pen to write
Until his ink were temperd with Loves sighs;
O, then his lines would ravish savage ears
And plant in tyrants mild humility.
From womens eyes this doctrine I derive:
They sparkle still the right Promethean fire;
They are the books, the arts, the academes,
That show, contain and nourish all the world:
Else none at all in ought proves excellent.
Then fools you were these women to forswear,
Or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools.
For wisdoms sake, a word that all men love,
Or for loves sake, a word that loves all men,
Or for mens sake, the authors of these women,
Or womens sake, by whom we men are men,
Let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves,
Or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths.
It is religion to be thus forsworn,
For charity itself fulfills the law,
And who can sever love from charity?
Saint Cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
Advance your standards, and upon them, lords;
Pell-mell, down with them! but be first advised,
In conflict that you get the sun of them.
Now to plain-dealing; lay these glozes by:
Shall we resolve to woo these girls of France?
And win them too: therefore let us devise
Some entertainment for them in their tents.
First, from the park let us conduct them thither;
Then homeward every man attach the hand
Of his fair mistress: in the afternoon
We will with some strange pastime solace them,
Such as the shortness of the time can shape;
For revels, dances, masks and merry hours
Forerun fair Love, strewing her way with flowers.
Away, away! no time shall be omitted
That will betime, and may by us be fitted.
Allons! allons! Sowd cockle reapd no corn;
And justice always whirls in equal measure:
Light wenches may prove plagues to men forsworn;
If so, our copper buys no better treasure.
Exeunt
LOVES LABOURS LOST
ACT V
SCENE I. The same.
Enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, and DULL
Satis quod sufficit.
I praise God for you, sir: your reasons at dinner
have been sharp and sententious; pleasant without
scurrility, witty without affection, audacious without
impudency, learned without opinion, and strange with-
out heresy. I did converse this quondam day with
a companion of the kings, who is intituled, nomi-
nated, or called, Don Adriano de Armado.
Novi hominem tanquam te: his humour is lofty, his
discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye
ambitious, his gait majestical, and his general
behavior vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. He is
too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it
were, too peregrinate, as I may call it.
A most singular and choice epithet.
Draws out his table-book
He draweth out the thread of his verbosity finer
than the staple of his argument. I abhor such
fanatical phantasimes, such insociable and
point-devise companions; such rackers of
orthography, as to speak dout, fine, when he should
say doubt; det, when he should pronounce debt,--d,
e, b, t, not d, e, t: he clepeth a calf, cauf;
half, hauf; neighbour vocatur nebor; neigh
abbreviated ne. This is abhominable,--which he
would call abbominable: it insinuateth me of
insanie: anne intelligis, domine? to make frantic, lunatic.
Laus Deo, bene intelligo.
Bon, bon, fort bon, Priscian! a little scratchd,
twill serve.
Videsne quis venit?
Video, et gaudeo.
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO, MOTH, and COSTARD
DON
Chirrah!
To MOTH
Quare chirrah, not sirrah?
DON
Men of peace, well encountered.
Most military sir, salutation.
[Aside to COSTARD]  They have been at a great feast
of languages, and stolen the scraps.
O, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words.
I marvel thy master hath not eaten thee for a word;
for thou art not so long by the head as
honorificabilitudinitatibus: thou art easier
swallowed than a flap-dragon.
Peace! the peal begins.
DON
[To HOLOFERNES]  Monsieur, are you not lettered?
Yes, yes; he teaches boys the hornbook. What is a,
b, spelt backward, with the horn on his head?
Ba, pueritia, with a horn added.
Ba, most silly sheep with a horn. You hear his learning.
Quis, quis, thou consonant?
The third of the five vowels, if you repeat them; or
the fifth, if I.
I will repeat them,--a, e, i,--
The sheep: the other two concludes it,--o, u.
DON
Now, by the salt wave of the Mediterraneum, a sweet
touch, a quick venue of wit! snip, snap, quick and
home! it rejoiceth my intellect: true wit!
Offered by a child to an old man; which is wit-old.
What is the figure? what is the figure?
Horns.
Thou disputest like an infant: go, whip thy gig.
Lend me your horn to make one, and I will whip about
your infamy circum circa,--a gig of a cuckolds horn.
An I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst
have it to buy gingerbread: hold, there is the very
remuneration I had of thy master, thou halfpenny
purse of wit, thou pigeon-egg of discretion. O, an
the heavens were so pleased that thou wert but my
bastard, what a joyful father wouldst thou make me!
Go to; thou hast it ad dunghill, at the fingers
ends, as they say.
O, I smell false Latin; dunghill for unguem.
DON
Arts-man, preambulate, we will be singled from the
barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the
charge-house on the top of the mountain?
Or mons, the hill.
DON
At your sweet pleasure, for the mountain.
I do, sans question.
DON
Sir, it is the kings most sweet pleasure and
affection to congratulate the princess at her
pavilion in the posteriors of this day, which the
rude multitude call the afternoon.
The posterior of the day, most generous sir, is
liable, congruent and measurable for the afternoon:
the word is well culled, chose, sweet and apt, I do
assure you, sir, I do assure.
DON
Sir, the king is a noble gentleman, and my familiar,
I do assure ye, very good friend: for what is
inward between us, let it pass. I do beseech thee,
remember thy courtesy; I beseech thee, apparel thy
head: and among other important and most serious
designs, and of great import indeed, too, but let
that pass: for I must tell thee, it will please his
grace, by the world, sometime to lean upon my poor
shoulder, and with his royal finger, thus, dally
with my excrement, with my mustachio; but, sweet
heart, let that pass. By the world, I recount no
fable: some certain special honours it pleaseth his
greatness to impart to Armado, a soldier, a man of
travel, that hath seen the world; but let that pass.
The very all of all is,--but, sweet heart, I do
implore secrecy,--that the king would have me
present the princess, sweet chuck, with some
delightful ostentation, or show, or pageant, or
antique, or firework. Now, understanding that the
curate and your sweet self are good at such
eruptions and sudden breaking out of mirth, as it
were, I have acquainted you withal, to the end to
crave your assistance.
Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Worthies.
Sir, as concerning some entertainment of time, some
show in the posterior of this day, to be rendered by
our assistants, at the kings command, and this most
gallant, illustrate, and learned gentleman, before
the princess; I say none so fit as to present the
Nine Worthies.
Where will you find men worthy enough to present them?
Joshua, yourself; myself and this gallant gentleman,
Judas Maccabaeus; this swain, because of his great
limb or joint, shall pass Pompey the Great; the
page, Hercules,--
DON
Pardon, sir; error: he is not quantity enough for
that Worthys thumb: he is not so big as the end of his club.
Shall I have audience? he shall present Hercules in
minority: his enter and exit shall be strangling a
snake; and I will have an apology for that purpose.
An excellent device! so, if any of the audience
hiss, you may cry Well done, Hercules! now thou
crushest the snake! that is the way to make an
offence gracious, though few have the grace to do it.
DON
For the rest of the Worthies?--
I will play three myself.
Thrice-worthy gentleman!
DON
Shall I tell you a thing?
We attend.
DON
We will have, if this fadge not, an antique. I
beseech you, follow.
Via, goodman Dull! thou hast spoken no word all this while.
Nor understood none neither, sir.
Allons! we will employ thee.
Ill make one in a dance, or so; or I will play
On the tabour to the Worthies, and let them dance the hay.
Most dull, honest Dull! To our sport, away!
Exeunt
LOVES LABOURS LOST
SCENE II. The same.
Enter the PRINCESS, KATHARINE, ROSALINE, and MARIA
Sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart,
If fairings come thus plentifully in:
A lady walld about with diamonds!
Look you what I have from the loving king.
Madame, came nothing else along with that?
Nothing but this! yes, as much love in rhyme
As would be crammd up in a sheet of paper,
Writ o both sides the leaf, margent and all,
That he was fain to seal on Cupids name.
That was the way to make his godhead wax,
For he hath been five thousand years a boy.
Ay, and a shrewd unhappy gallows too.
Youll neer be friends with him; a killd your sister.
He made her melancholy, sad, and heavy;
And so she died: had she been light, like you,
Of such a merry, nimble, stirring spirit,
She might ha been a grandam ere she died:
And so may you; for a light heart lives long.
Whats your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
A light condition in a beauty dark.
We need more light to find your meaning out.
Youll mar the light by taking it in snuff;
Therefore Ill darkly end the argument.
Look what you do, you do it still i the dark.
So do not you, for you are a light wench.
Indeed I weigh not you, and therefore light.
You weigh me not? O, thats you care not for me.
Great reason; for past cure is still past care.
Well bandied both; a set of wit well playd.
But Rosaline, you have a favour too:
Who sent it? and what is it?
I would you knew:
An if my face were but as fair as yours,
My favour were as great; be witness this.
Nay, I have verses too, I thank Biron:
The numbers true; and, were the numbering too,
I were the fairest goddess on the ground:
I am compared to twenty thousand fairs.
O, he hath drawn my picture in his letter!
Any thing like?
Much in the letters; nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as ink; a good conclusion.
Fair as a text B in a copy-book.
Ware pencils, ho! let me not die your debtor,
My red dominical, my golden letter:
O, that your face were not so full of Os!
A pox of that jest! and I beshrew all shrows.
But, Katharine, what was sent to you from fair Dumain?
Madam, this glove.
Did he not send you twain?
Yes, madam, and moreover
Some thousand verses of a faithful lover,
A huge translation of hypocrisy,
Vilely compiled, profound simplicity.
This and these pearls to me sent Longaville:
The letter is too long by half a mile.
I think no less. Dost thou not wish in heart
The chain were longer and the letter short?
Ay, or I would these hands might never part.
We are wise girls to mock our lovers so.
They are worse fools to purchase mocking so.
That same Biron Ill torture ere I go:
O that I knew he were but in by the week!
How I would make him fawn and beg and seek
And wait the season and observe the times
And spend his prodigal wits in bootless rhymes
And shape his service wholly to my hests
And make him proud to make me proud that jests!
So perttaunt-like would I oersway his state
That he should be my fool and I his fate.
None are so surely caught, when they are catchd,
As wit turnd fool: folly, in wisdom hatchd,
Hath wisdoms warrant and the help of school
And wits own grace to grace a learned fool.
The blood of youth burns not with such excess
As gravitys revolt to wantonness.
Folly in fools bears not so strong a note
As foolery in the wise, when wit doth dote;
Since all the power thereof it doth apply
To prove, by wit, worth in simplicity.
Here comes Boyet, and mirth is in his face.
Enter BOYET
O, I am stabbd with laughter! Wheres her grace?
Thy news Boyet?
Prepare, madam, prepare!
Arm, wenches, arm! encounters mounted are
Against your peace: Love doth approach disguised,
Armed in arguments; youll be surprised:
Muster your wits; stand in your own defence;
Or hide your heads like cowards, and fly hence.
Saint Denis to Saint Cupid! What are they
That charge their breath against us? say, scout, say.
Under the cool shade of a sycamore
I thought to close mine eyes some half an hour;
When, lo! to interrupt my purposed rest,
Toward that shade I might behold addrest
The king and his companions: warily
I stole into a neighbour thicket by,
And overheard what you shall overhear,
That, by and by, disguised they will be here.
Their herald is a pretty knavish page,
That well by heart hath connd his embassage:
Action and accent did they teach him there;
Thus must thou speak, and thus thy body bear:
And ever and anon they made a doubt
Presence majestical would put him out,
For, quoth the king, an angel shalt thou see;
Yet fear not thou, but speak audaciously.
The boy replied, An angel is not evil;
I should have feard her had she been a devil.
With that, all laughd and clappd him on the shoulder,
Making the bold wag by their praises bolder:
One rubbd his elbow thus, and fleerd and swore
A better speech was never spoke before;
Another, with his finger and his thumb,
Cried, Via! we will dot, come what will come;
The third he caperd, and cried, All goes well;
The fourth turnd on the toe, and down he fell.
With that, they all did tumble on the ground,
With such a zealous laughter, so profound,
That in this spleen ridiculous appears,
To cheque their folly, passions solemn tears.
But what, but what, come they to visit us?
They do, they do: and are apparelld thus.
Like Muscovites or Russians, as I guess.
Their purpose is to parle, to court and dance;
And every one his love-feat will advance
Unto his several mistress, which theyll know
By favours several which they did bestow.
And will they so? the gallants shall be taskd;
For, ladies, we shall every one be maskd;
And not a man of them shall have the grace,
Despite of suit, to see a ladys face.
Hold, Rosaline, this favour thou shalt wear,
And then the king will court thee for his dear;
Hold, take thou this, my sweet, and give me thine,
So shall Biron take me for Rosaline.
And change your favours too; so shall your loves
Woo contrary, deceived by these removes.
Come on, then; wear the favours most in sight.
But in this changing what is your intent?
The effect of my intent is to cross theirs:
They do it but in mocking merriment;
And mock for mock is only my intent.
Their several counsels they unbosom shall
To loves mistook, and so be mockd withal
Upon the next occasion that we meet,
With visages displayed, to talk and greet.
But shall we dance, if they desire tot?
No, to the death, we will not move a foot;
Nor to their pennd speech render we no grace,
But while tis spoke each turn away her face.
Why, that contempt will kill the speakers heart,
And quite divorce his memory from his part.
Therefore I do it; and I make no doubt
The rest will neer come in, if he be out
Theres no such sport as sport by sport oerthrown,
To make theirs ours and ours none but our own:
So shall we stay, mocking intended game,
And they, well mockd, depart away with shame.
Trumpets sound within
The trumpet sounds: be maskd; the maskers come.
The Ladies mask
Enter Blackamoors with music; MOTH; FERDINAND,  BIRON, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN, in Russian habits, and masked
All hail, the richest beauties on the earth!--
Beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
A holy parcel of the fairest dames.
The Ladies turn their backs to him
That ever turnd their--backs--to mortal views!
[Aside to MOTH]  Their eyes, villain, their eyes!
That ever turnd their eyes to mortal views!--Out--
True; out indeed.
Out of your favours, heavenly spirits, vouchsafe
Not to behold--
[Aside to MOTH]  Once to behold, rogue.
Once to behold with your sun-beamed eyes,
--with your sun-beamed eyes--
They will not answer to that epithet;
You were best call it daughter-beamed eyes.
They do not mark me, and that brings me out.
Is this your perfectness? be gone, you rogue!
Exit MOTH
What would these strangers? know their minds, Boyet:
If they do speak our language, tis our will:
That some plain man recount their purposes
Know what they would.
What would you with the princess?
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
What would they, say they?
Nothing but peace and gentle visitation.
Why, that they have; and bid them so be gone.
She says, you have it, and you may be gone.
Say to her, we have measured many miles
To tread a measure with her on this grass.
They say, that they have measured many a mile
To tread a measure with you on this grass.
It is not so. Ask them how many inches
Is in one mile: if they have measured many,
The measure then of one is easily told.
If to come hither you have measured miles,
And many miles, the princess bids you tell
How many inches doth fill up one mile.
Tell her, we measure them by weary steps.
She hears herself.
How many weary steps,
Of many weary miles you have oergone,
Are numberd in the travel of one mile?
We number nothing that we spend for you:
Our duty is so rich, so infinite,
That we may do it still without accompt.
Vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face,
That we, like savages, may worship it.
My face is but a moon, and clouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do!
Vouchsafe, bright moon, and these thy stars, to shine,
Those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
O vain petitioner! beg a greater matter;
Thou now requestst but moonshine in the water.
Then, in our measure do but vouchsafe one change.
Thou bidst me beg: this begging is not strange.
Play, music, then! Nay, you must do it soon.
Music plays
Not yet! no dance! Thus change I like the moon.
Will you not dance? How come you thus estranged?
You took the moon at full, but now shes changed.
Yet still she is the moon, and I the man.
The music plays; vouchsafe some motion to it.
Our ears vouchsafe it.
