But your legs should do it.
Since you are strangers and come here by chance,
Well not be nice: take hands. We will not dance.
Why take we hands, then?
Only to part friends:
Curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.
More measure of this measure; be not nice.
We can afford no more at such a price.
Prize you yourselves: what buys your company?
Your absence only.
That can never be.
Then cannot we be bought: and so, adieu;
Twice to your visor, and half once to you.
If you deny to dance, lets hold more chat.
In private, then.
I am best pleased with that.
They converse apart
White-handed mistress, one sweet word with thee.
Honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
Nay then, two treys, and if you grow so nice,
Metheglin, wort, and malmsey: well run, dice!
Theres half-a-dozen sweets.
Seventh sweet, adieu:
Since you can cog, Ill play no more with you.
One word in secret.
Let it not be sweet.
Thou grievest my gall.
Gall! bitter.
Therefore meet.
They converse apart
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
Name it.
Fair lady,--
Say you so? Fair lord,--
Take that for your fair lady.
Please it you,
As much in private, and Ill bid adieu.
They converse apart
What, was your vizard made without a tongue?
I know the reason, lady, why you ask.
O for your reason! quickly, sir; I long.
You have a double tongue within your mask,
And would afford my speechless vizard half.
Veal, quoth the Dutchman. Is not veal a calf?
A calf, fair lady!
No, a fair lord calf.
Lets part the word.
No, Ill not be your half
Take all, and wean it; it may prove an ox.
Look, how you butt yourself in these sharp mocks!
Will you give horns, chaste lady? do not so.
Then die a calf, before your horns do grow.
One word in private with you, ere I die.
Bleat softly then; the butcher hears you cry.
They converse apart
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen
As is the razors edge invisible,
Cutting a smaller hair than may be seen,
Above the sense of sense; so sensible
Seemeth their conference; their conceits have wings
Fleeter than arrows, bullets, wind, thought, swifter things.
Not one word more, my maids; break off, break off.
By heaven, all dry-beaten with pure scoff!
Farewell, mad wenches; you have simple wits.
Twenty adieus, my frozen Muscovits.
Exeunt FERDINAND, Lords, and Blackamoors
Are these the breed of wits so wonderd at?
Tapers they are, with your sweet breaths puffd out.
Well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; fat, fat.
O poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout!
Will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight?
Or ever, but in vizards, show their faces?
This pert Biron was out of countenance quite.
O, they were all in lamentable cases!
The king was weeping-ripe for a good word.
Biron did swear himself out of all suit.
Dumain was at my service, and his sword:
No point, quoth I; my servant straight was mute.
Lord Longaville said, I came oer his heart;
And trow you what he called me?
Qualm, perhaps.
Yes, in good faith.
Go, sickness as thou art!
Well, better wits have worn plain statute-caps.
But will you hear? the king is my love sworn.
And quick Biron hath plighted faith to me.
And Longaville was for my service born.
Dumain is mine, as sure as bark on tree.
Madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear:
Immediately they will again be here
In their own shapes; for it can never be
They will digest this harsh indignity.
Will they return?
They will, they will, God knows,
And leap for joy, though they are lame with blows:
Therefore change favours; and, when they repair,
Blow like sweet roses in this summer air.
How blow? how blow? speak to be understood.
Fair ladies maskd are roses in their bud;
Dismaskd, their damask sweet commixture shown,
Are angels vailing clouds, or roses blown.
Avaunt, perplexity! What shall we do,
If they return in their own shapes to woo?
Good madam, if by me youll be advised,
Lets, mock them still, as well known as disguised:
Let us complain to them what fools were here,
Disguised like Muscovites, in shapeless gear;
And wonder what they were and to what end
Their shallow shows and prologue vilely pennd
And their rough carriage so ridiculous,
Should be presented at our tent to us.
Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand.
Whip to our tents, as roes run oer land.
Exeunt PRINCESS, ROSALINE, KATHARINE, and MARIA
Re-enter FERDINAND, BIRON, LONGAVILLE, and DUMAIN, in their proper habits
Fair sir, God save you! Wheres the princess?
Gone to her tent. Please it your majesty
Command me any service to her thither?
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
I will; and so will she, I know, my lord.
Exit
This fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease,
And utters it again when God doth please:
He is wits pedler, and retails his wares
At wakes and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs;
And we that sell by gross, the Lord doth know,
Have not the grace to grace it with such show.
This gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve;
Had he been Adam, he had tempted Eve;
A can carve too, and lisp: why, this is he
That kissd his hand away in courtesy;
This is the ape of form, monsieur the nice,
That, when he plays at tables, chides the dice
In honourable terms: nay, he can sing
A mean most meanly; and in ushering
Mend him who can: the ladies call him sweet;
The stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet:
This is the flower that smiles on every one,
To show his teeth as white as whales bone;
And consciences, that will not die in debt,
Pay him the due of honey-tongued Boyet.
A blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart,
That put Armados page out of his part!
See where it comes! Behavior, what wert thou
Till this madman showd thee? and what art thou now?
Re-enter the PRINCESS, ushered by BOYET, ROSALINE, MARIA, and KATHARINE
All hail, sweet madam, and fair time of day!
Fair in all hail is foul, as I conceive.
Construe my speeches better, if you may.
Then wish me better; I will give you leave.
We came to visit you, and purpose now
To lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
This field shall hold me; and so hold your vow:
Nor God, nor I, delights in perjured men.
Rebuke me not for that which you provoke:
The virtue of your eye must break my oath.
You nickname virtue; vice you should have spoke;
For virtues office never breaks mens troth.
Now by my maiden honour, yet as pure
As the unsullied lily, I protest,
A world of torments though I should endure,
I would not yield to be your houses guest;
So much I hate a breaking cause to be
Of heavenly oaths, vowd with integrity.
O, you have lived in desolation here,
Unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
Not so, my lord; it is not so, I swear;
We have had pastimes here and pleasant game:
A mess of Russians left us but of late.
How, madam! Russians!
Ay, in truth, my lord;
Trim gallants, full of courtship and of state.
Madam, speak true. It is not so, my lord:
My lady, to the manner of the days,
In courtesy gives undeserving praise.
We four indeed confronted were with four
In Russian habit: here they stayd an hour,
And talkd apace; and in that hour, my lord,
They did not bless us with one happy word.
I dare not call them fools; but this I think,
When they are thirsty, fools would fain have drink.
This jest is dry to me. Fair gentle sweet,
Your wit makes wise things foolish: when we greet,
With eyes best seeing, heavens fiery eye,
By light we lose light: your capacity
Is of that nature that to your huge store
Wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
This proves you wise and rich, for in my eye,--
I am a fool, and full of poverty.
But that you take what doth to you belong,
It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
O, I am yours, and all that I possess!
All the fool mine?
I cannot give you less.
Which of the vizards was it that you wore?
Where? when? what vizard? why demand you this?
There, then, that vizard; that superfluous case
That hid the worse and showd the better face.
We are descried; theyll mock us now downright.
Let us confess and turn it to a jest.
Amazed, my lord? why looks your highness sad?
Help, hold his brows! hell swoon! Why look you pale?
Sea-sick, I think, coming from Muscovy.
Thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury.
Can any face of brass hold longer out?
lady, dart thy skill at me;
Bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout;
Thrust thy sharp wit quite through my ignorance;
Cut me to pieces with thy keen conceit;
And I will wish thee never more to dance,
Nor never more in Russian habit wait.
O, never will I trust to speeches pennd,
Nor to the motion of a schoolboys tongue,
Nor never come in vizard to my friend,
Nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harpers song!
Taffeta phrases, silken terms precise,
Three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation,
Figures pedantical; these summer-flies
Have blown me full of maggot ostentation:
I do forswear them; and I here protest,
By this white glove;--how white the hand, God knows!--
Henceforth my wooing mind shall be expressd
In russet yeas and honest kersey noes:
And, to begin, wench,--so God help me, la!--
My love to thee is sound, sans crack or flaw.
Sans sans, I pray you.
Yet I have a trick
Of the old rage: bear with me, I am sick;
Ill leave it by degrees. Soft, let us see:
Write, Lord have mercy on us on those three;
They are infected; in their hearts it lies;
They have the plague, and caught it of your eyes;
These lords are visited; you are not free,
For the Lords tokens on you do I see.
No, they are free that gave these tokens to us.
Our states are forfeit: seek not to undo us.
It is not so; for how can this be true,
That you stand forfeit, being those that sue?
Peace! for I will not have to do with you.
Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
Speak for yourselves; my wit is at an end.
Teach us, sweet madam, for our rude transgression
Some fair excuse.
The fairest is confession.
Were not you here but even now disguised?
Madam, I was.
And were you well advised?
I was, fair madam.
When you then were here,
What did you whisper in your ladys ear?
That more than all the world I did respect her.
When she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
Upon mine honour, no.
Peace, peace! forbear:
Your oath once broke, you force not to forswear.
Despise me, when I break this oath of mine.
I will: and therefore keep it. Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your ear?
Madam, he swore that he did hold me dear
As precious eyesight, and did value me
Above this world; adding thereto moreover
That he would wed me, or else die my lover.
God give thee joy of him! the noble lord
Most honourably doth unhold his word.
What mean you, madam? by my life, my troth,
I never swore this lady such an oath.
By heaven, you did; and to confirm it plain,
You gave me this: but take it, sir, again.
My faith and this the princess I did give:
I knew her by this jewel on her sleeve.
Pardon me, sir, this jewel did she wear;
And Lord Biron, I thank him, is my dear.
What, will you have me, or your pearl again?
Neither of either; I remit both twain.
I see the trick ont: here was a consent,
Knowing aforehand of our merriment,
To dash it like a Christmas comedy:
Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight zany,
Some mumble-news, some trencher-knight, some Dick,
That smiles his cheek in years and knows the trick
To make my lady laugh when shes disposed,
Told our intents before; which once disclosed,
The ladies did change favours: and then we,
Following the signs, wood but the sign of she.
Now, to our perjury to add more terror,
We are again forsworn, in will and error.
Much upon this it is: and might not you
To BOYET
Forestall our sport, to make us thus untrue?
Do not you know my ladys foot by the squier,
And laugh upon the apple of her eye?
And stand between her back, sir, and the fire,
Holding a trencher, jesting merrily?
You put our page out: go, you are allowd;
Die when you will, a smock shall be your shroud.
You leer upon me, do you? theres an eye
Wounds like a leaden sword.
Full merrily
Hath this brave manage, this career, been run.
Lo, he is tilting straight! Peace! I have done.
Enter COSTARD
Welcome, pure wit! thou partest a fair fray.
O Lord, sir, they would know
Whether the three Worthies shall come in or no.
What, are there but three?
No, sir; but it is vara fine,
For every one pursents three.
And three times thrice is nine.
Not so, sir; under correction, sir; I hope it is not so.
You cannot beg us, sir, I can assure you, sir we know
what we know:
I hope, sir, three times thrice, sir,--
Is not nine.
Under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it doth amount.
By Jove, I always took three threes for nine.
O Lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living
by reckoning, sir.
How much is it?
O Lord, sir, the parties themselves, the actors,
sir, will show whereuntil it doth amount: for mine
own part, I am, as they say, but to parfect one man
in one poor man, Pompion the Great, sir.
Art thou one of the Worthies?
It pleased them to think me worthy of Pompion the
Great: for mine own part, I know not the degree of
the Worthy, but I am to stand for him.
Go, bid them prepare.
We will turn it finely off, sir; we will take
some care.
Exit
Biron, they will shame us: let them not approach.
We are shame-proof, my lord: and tis some policy
To have one show worse than the kings and his company.
I say they shall not come.
Nay, my good lord, let me oerrule you now:
That sport best pleases that doth least know how:
Where zeal strives to content, and the contents
Dies in the zeal of that which it presents:
Their form confounded makes most form in mirth,
When great things labouring perish in their birth.
A right description of our sport, my lord.
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO
DON
Anointed, I implore so much expense of thy royal
sweet breath as will utter a brace of words.
Converses apart with FERDINAND, and delivers him a paper
Doth this man serve God?
Why ask you?
He speaks not like a man of Gods making.
DON
That is all one, my fair, sweet, honey monarch; for,
I protest, the schoolmaster is exceeding
fantastical; too, too vain, too too vain: but we
will put it, as they say, to fortuna de la guerra.
I wish you the peace of mind, most royal couplement!
Exit
Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies. He
presents Hector of Troy; the swain, Pompey the
Great; the parish curate, Alexander; Armados page,
Hercules; the pedant, Judas Maccabaeus: And if
these four Worthies in their first show thrive,
These four will change habits, and present the other five.
There is five in the first show.
You are deceived; tis not so.
The pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool
and the boy:--
Abate throw at novum, and the whole world again
Cannot pick out five such, take each one in his vein.
The ship is under sail, and here she comes amain.
Enter COSTARD, for Pompey
I Pompey am,--
You lie, you are not he.
I Pompey am,--
With libbards head on knee.
Well said, old mocker: I must needs be friends
with thee.
I Pompey am, Pompey surnamed the Big--
The Great.
It is, Great, sir:--
Pompey surnamed the Great;
That oft in field, with targe and shield, did make
my foe to sweat:
And travelling along this coast, I here am come by chance,
And lay my arms before the legs of this sweet lass of France,
If your ladyship would say, Thanks, Pompey, I had done.
Great thanks, great Pompey.
Tis not so much worth; but I hope I was perfect: I
made a little fault in Great.
My hat to a halfpenny, Pompey proves the best Worthy.
Enter SIR NATHANIEL, for Alexander
When in the world I lived, I was the worlds
commander;
By east, west, north, and south, I spread my
conquering might:
My scutcheon plain declares that I am Alisander,--
Your nose says, no, you are not for it stands too right.
Your nose smells no in this, most tender-smelling knight.
The conqueror is dismayd. Proceed, good Alexander.
When in the world I lived, I was the worlds
commander,--
Most true, tis right; you were so, Alisander.
Pompey the Great,--
Your servant, and Costard.
Take away the conqueror, take away Alisander.
[To SIR NATHANIEL]  O, sir, you have overthrown
Alisander the conqueror! You will be scraped out of
the painted cloth for this: your lion, that holds
his poll-axe sitting on a close-stool, will be given
to Ajax: he will be the ninth Worthy. A conqueror,
and afeard to speak! run away for shame, Alisander.
SIR NATHANIEL retires
There, ant shall please you; a foolish mild man; an
honest man, look you, and soon dashed. He is a
marvellous good neighbour, faith, and a very good
bowler: but, for Alisander,--alas, you see how
tis,--a little oerparted. But there are Worthies
a-coming will speak their mind in some other sort.
Enter HOLOFERNES, for Judas; and MOTH, for Hercules
Great Hercules is presented by this imp,
Whose club killd Cerberus, that three-headed canis;
And when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp,
Thus did he strangle serpents in his manus.
Quoniam he seemeth in minority,
Ergo I come with this apology.
Keep some state in thy exit, and vanish.
MOTH retires
Judas I am,--
A Judas!
Not Iscariot, sir.
Judas I am, ycliped Maccabaeus.
Judas Maccabaeus clipt is plain Judas.
A kissing traitor. How art thou proved Judas?
Judas I am,--
The more shame for you, Judas.
What mean you, sir?
To make Judas hang himself.
Begin, sir; you are my elder.
Well followed: Judas was hanged on an elder.
I will not be put out of countenance.
Because thou hast no face.
What is this?
A cittern-head.
The head of a bodkin.
A Deaths face in a ring.
The face of an old Roman coin, scarce seen.
The pommel of Caesars falchion.
The carved-bone face on a flask.
Saint Georges half-cheek in a brooch.
Ay, and in a brooch of lead.
Ay, and worn in the cap of a tooth-drawer.
And now forward; for we have put thee in countenance.
You have put me out of countenance.
False; we have given thee faces.
But you have out-faced them all.
An thou wert a lion, we would do so.
Therefore, as he is an ass, let him go.
And so adieu, sweet Jude! nay, why dost thou stay?
For the latter end of his name.
For the ass to the Jude; give it him:--Jud-as, away!
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
A light for Monsieur Judas! it grows dark, he may stumble.
HOLOFERNES retires
Alas, poor Maccabaeus, how hath he been baited!
Enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO, for Hector
Hide thy head, Achilles: here comes Hector in arms.
Though my mocks come home by me, I will now be merry.
Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this.
But is this Hector?
I think Hector was not so clean-timbered.
His leg is too big for Hectors.
More calf, certain.
No; he is best endued in the small.
This cannot be Hector.
Hes a god or a painter; for he makes faces.
DON
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty,
Gave Hector a gift,--
A gilt nutmeg.
A lemon.
Stuck with cloves.
No, cloven.
DON
Peace!--
The armipotent Mars, of lances the almighty
Gave Hector a gift, the heir of Ilion;
A man so breathed, that certain he would fight; yea
From morn till night, out of his pavilion.
I am that flower,--
That mint.
That columbine.
DON
Sweet Lord Longaville, rein thy tongue.
I must rather give it the rein, for it runs against Hector.
Ay, and Hectors a greyhound.
DON
The sweet war-man is dead and rotten; sweet chucks,
beat not the bones of the buried: when he breathed,
he was a man. But I will forward with my device.
To the PRINCESS
Sweet royalty, bestow on me the sense of hearing.
Speak, brave Hector: we are much delighted.
DON
I do adore thy sweet graces slipper.
[Aside to DUMAIN]  Loves her by the foot,--
[Aside to BOYET]  He may not by the yard.
DON
This Hector far surmounted Hannibal,--
The party is gone, fellow Hector, she is gone; she
is two months on her way.
DON
What meanest thou?
Faith, unless you play the honest Troyan, the poor
wench is cast away: shes quick; the child brags in
her belly already: tis yours.
DON
Dost thou infamonize me among potentates? thou shalt
die.
Then shall Hector be whipped for Jaquenetta that is
quick by him and hanged for Pompey that is dead by
him.
Most rare Pompey!
Renowned Pompey!
Greater than great, great, great, great Pompey!
Pompey the Huge!
Hector trembles.
Pompey is moved. More Ates, more Ates! stir them
on! stir them on!
Hector will challenge him.
Ay, if a have no mans blood ins belly than will
sup a flea.
DON
By the north pole, I do challenge thee.
I will not fight with a pole, like a northern man:
Ill slash; Ill do it by the sword. I bepray you,
let me borrow my arms again.
Room for the incensed Worthies!
Ill do it in my shirt.
Most resolute Pompey!
Master, let me take you a buttonhole lower. Do you
not see Pompey is uncasing for the combat? What mean
you? You will lose your reputation.
DON
Gentlemen and soldiers, pardon me; I will not combat
in my shirt.
You may not deny it: Pompey hath made the challenge.
DON
Sweet bloods, I both may and will.
What reason have you fort?
DON
The naked truth of it is, I have no shirt; I go
woolward for penance.
True, and it was enjoined him in Rome for want of
linen: since when, Ill be sworn, he wore none but
a dishclout of Jaquenettas, and that a wears next
his heart for a favour.
Enter MERCADE
God save you, madam!
Welcome, Mercade;
But that thou interruptst our merriment.
I am sorry, madam; for the news I bring
Is heavy in my tongue. The king your father--
Dead, for my life!
Even so; my tale is told.
Worthies, away! the scene begins to cloud.
DON
For mine own part, I breathe free breath. I have
seen the day of wrong through the little hole of
discretion, and I will right myself like a soldier.
Exeunt Worthies
How fares your majesty?
Boyet, prepare; I will away tonight.
Madam, not so; I do beseech you, stay.
Prepare, I say. I thank you, gracious lords,
For all your fair endeavors; and entreat,
Out of a new-sad soul, that you vouchsafe
In your rich wisdom to excuse or hide
The liberal opposition of our spirits,
If over-boldly we have borne ourselves
In the converse of breath: your gentleness
Was guilty of it. Farewell worthy lord!
A heavy heart bears not a nimble tongue:
Excuse me so, coming too short of thanks
For my great suit so easily obtaind.
The extreme parts of time extremely forms
All causes to the purpose of his speed,
And often at his very loose decides
That which long process could not arbitrate:
And though the mourning brow of progeny
Forbid the smiling courtesy of love
The holy suit which fain it would convince,
Yet, since loves argument was first on foot,
Let not the cloud of sorrow justle it
From what it purposed; since, to wail friends lost
Is not by much so wholesome-profitable
As to rejoice at friends but newly found.
I understand you not: my griefs are double.
Honest plain words best pierce the ear of grief;
And by these badges understand the king.
For your fair sakes have we neglected time,
Playd foul play with our oaths: your beauty, ladies,
Hath much deformd us, fashioning our humours
Even to the opposed end of our intents:
And what in us hath seemd ridiculous,--
As love is full of unbefitting strains,
All wanton as a child, skipping and vain,
Formd by the eye and therefore, like the eye,
Full of strange shapes, of habits and of forms,
Varying in subjects as the eye doth roll
To every varied object in his glance:
Which parti-coated presence of loose love
Put on by us, if, in your heavenly eyes,
Have misbecomed our oaths and gravities,
Those heavenly eyes, that look into these faults,
Suggested us to make. Therefore, ladies,
Our love being yours, the error that love makes
Is likewise yours: we to ourselves prove false,
By being once false for ever to be true
To those that make us both,--fair ladies, you:
And even that falsehood, in itself a sin,
Thus purifies itself and turns to grace.
We have received your letters full of love;
Your favours, the ambassadors of love;
And, in our maiden council, rated them
At courtship, pleasant jest and courtesy,
As bombast and as lining to the time:
But more devout than this in our respects
Have we not been; and therefore met your loves
In their own fashion, like a merriment.
Our letters, madam, showd much more than jest.
So did our looks.
We did not quote them so.
Now, at the latest minute of the hour,
Grant us your loves.
A time, methinks, too short
To make a world-without-end bargain in.
No, no, my lord, your grace is perjured much,
Full of dear guiltiness; and therefore this:
If for my love, as there is no such cause,
You will do aught, this shall you do for me:
Your oath I will not trust; but go with speed
To some forlorn and naked hermitage,
Remote from all the pleasures of the world;
There stay until the twelve celestial signs
Have brought about the annual reckoning.
If this austere insociable life
Change not your offer made in heat of blood;
If frosts and fasts, hard lodging and thin weeds
Nip not the gaudy blossoms of your love,
But that it bear this trial and last love;
Then, at the expiration of the year,
Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts,
And, by this virgin palm now kissing thine
I will be thine; and till that instant shut
My woeful self up in a mourning house,
Raining the tears of lamentation
For the remembrance of my fathers death.
If this thou do deny, let our hands part,
Neither entitled in the others heart.
If this, or more than this, I would deny,
To flatter up these powers of mine with rest,
The sudden hand of death close up mine eye!
Hence ever then my heart is in thy breast.
But what to me, my love? but what to me? A wife?
A beard, fair health, and honesty;
With three-fold love I wish you all these three.
O, shall I say, I thank you, gentle wife?
Not so, my lord; a twelvemonth and a day
Ill mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say:
Come when the king doth to my lady come;
Then, if I have much love, Ill give you some.
Ill serve thee true and faithfully till then.
Yet swear not, lest ye be forsworn again.
What says Maria?
At the twelvemonths end
Ill change my black gown for a faithful friend.
Ill stay with patience; but the time is long.
The liker you; few taller are so young.
Studies my lady? mistress, look on me;
Behold the window of my heart, mine eye,
What humble suit attends thy answer there:
Impose some service on me for thy love.
Oft have I heard of you, my Lord Biron,
Before I saw you; and the worlds large tongue
Proclaims you for a man replete with mocks,
Full of comparisons and wounding flouts,
Which you on all estates will execute
That lie within the mercy of your wit.
To weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain,
And therewithal to win me, if you please,
Without the which I am not to be won,
You shall this twelvemonth term from day to day
Visit the speechless sick and still converse
With groaning wretches; and your task shall be,
With all the fierce endeavor of your wit
To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
To move wild laughter in the throat of death?
It cannot be; it is impossible:
Mirth cannot move a soul in agony.
Why, thats the way to choke a gibing spirit,
Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools:
A jests prosperity lies in the ear
Of him that hears it, never in the tongue
Of him that makes it: then, if sickly ears,
Deafd with the clamours of their own dear groans,
Will hear your idle scorns, continue then,
And I will have you and that fault withal;
But if they will not, throw away that spirit,
And I shall find you empty of that fault,
Right joyful of your reformation.
A twelvemonth! well; befall what will befall,
Ill jest a twelvemonth in an hospital.
[To FERDINAND]  Ay, sweet my lord; and so I take my leave.
No, madam; we will bring you on your way.
Our wooing doth not end like an old play;
Jack hath not Jill: these ladies courtesy
Might well have made our sport a comedy.
Come, sir, it wants a twelvemonth and a day,
And then twill end.
Thats too long for a play.
Re-enter DON ADRIANO DE ARMADO
DON
Sweet majesty, vouchsafe me,--
Was not that Hector?
The worthy knight of Troy.
DON
I will kiss thy royal finger, and take leave. I am
a votary; I have vowed to Jaquenetta to hold the
plough for her sweet love three years. But, most
esteemed greatness, will you hear the dialogue that
the two learned men have compiled in praise of the
owl and the cuckoo? It should have followed in the
end of our show.
Call them forth quickly; we will do so.
DON
Holla! approach.
Re-enter HOLOFERNES, SIR NATHANIEL, MOTH, COSTARD, and others
This side is Hiems, Winter, this Ver, the Spring;
the one maintained by the owl, the other by the
cuckoo. Ver, begin.
THE SONG
SPRING.
When daisies pied and violets blue
And lady-smocks all silver-white
And cuckoo-buds of yellow hue
Do paint the meadows with delight,
The cuckoo then, on every tree,
Mocks married men; for thus sings he, Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear!
When shepherds pipe on oaten straws
And merry larks are ploughmens clocks,
When turtles tread, and rooks, and daws,
And maidens bleach their summer smocks
The cuckoo then, on every tree,
Mocks married men; for thus sings he, Cuckoo;
Cuckoo, cuckoo: O word of fear,
Unpleasing to a married ear!
WINTER.
When icicles hang by the wall
And Dick the shepherd blows his nail
And Tom bears logs into the hall
And milk comes frozen home in pail,
When blood is nippd and ways be foul,
Then nightly sings the staring owl, Tu-whit;
Tu-who, a merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
When all aloud the wind doth blow
And coughing drowns the parsons saw
And birds sit brooding in the snow
And Marians nose looks red and raw,
When roasted crabs hiss in the bowl,
Then nightly sings the staring owl, Tu-whit;
Tu-who, a merry note,
While greasy Joan doth keel the pot.
DON
The words of Mercury are harsh after the songs of
Apollo. You that way: we this way.
Exeunt
ACT I
SCENE I. A desert place.
Thunder and lightning. Enter three Witches
When shall we three meet again
In thunder, lightning, or in rain?
When the hurlyburlys done,
When the battles lost and won.
That will be ere the set of sun.
Where the place?
Upon the heath.
There to meet with Macbeth.
I come, Graymalkin!
Paddock calls.
Anon.
Fair is foul, and foul is fair:
Hover through the fog and filthy air.
Exeunt
SCENE II. A camp near Forres.
Alarum within. Enter DUNCAN, MALCOLM, DONALBAIN, LENNOX, with Attendants, meeting a bleeding Sergeant
What bloody man is that? He can report,
As seemeth by his plight, of the revolt
The newest state.
This is the sergeant
Who like a good and hardy soldier fought
Gainst my captivity. Hail, brave friend!
Say to the king the knowledge of the broil
As thou didst leave it.
Doubtful it stood;
As two spent swimmers, that do cling together
And choke their art. The merciless Macdonwald--
Worthy to be a rebel, for to that
The multiplying villanies of nature
Do swarm upon him--from the western isles
Of kerns and gallowglasses is supplied;
And fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling,
Showd like a rebels whore: but alls too weak:
For brave Macbeth--well he deserves that name--
Disdaining fortune, with his brandishd steel,
Which smoked with bloody execution,
Like valours minion carved out his passage
Till he faced the slave;
Which neer shook hands, nor bade farewell to him,
Till he unseamd him from the nave to the chaps,
And fixd his head upon our battlements.
O valiant cousin! worthy gentleman!
As whence the sun gins his reflection
Shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break,
So from that spring whence comfort seemd to come
Discomfort swells. Mark, king of Scotland, mark:
No sooner justice had with valour armd
Compelld these skipping kerns to trust their heels,
But the Norweyan lord surveying vantage,
With furbishd arms and new supplies of men
Began a fresh assault.
Dismayd not this
Our captains, Macbeth and Banquo?
Yes;
As sparrows eagles, or the hare the lion.
If I say sooth, I must report they were
As cannons overcharged with double cracks, so they
Doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe:
Except they meant to bathe in reeking wounds,
Or memorise another Golgotha,
I cannot tell.
But I am faint, my gashes cry for help.
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds;
They smack of honour both. Go get him surgeons.
Exit Sergeant, attended
Who comes here?
Enter ROSS
The worthy thane of Ross.
What a haste looks through his eyes! So should he look
That seems to speak things strange.
God save the king!
Whence camest thou, worthy thane?
From Fife, great king;
Where the Norweyan banners flout the sky
And fan our people cold. Norway himself,
With terrible numbers,
Assisted by that most disloyal traitor
The thane of Cawdor, began a dismal conflict;
Till that Bellonas bridegroom, lappd in proof,
Confronted him with self-comparisons,
Point against point rebellious, arm gainst arm.
Curbing his lavish spirit: and, to conclude,
The victory fell on us.
Great happiness!
That now
Sweno, the Norways king, craves composition:
Nor would we deign him burial of his men
Till he disbursed at Saint Colmes inch
Ten thousand dollars to our general use.
No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive
Our bosom interest: go pronounce his present death,
And with his former title greet Macbeth.
Ill see it done.
What he hath lost noble Macbeth hath won.
Exeunt
SCENE III. A heath near Forres.
Thunder. Enter the three Witches
Where hast thou been, sister?
Killing swine.
Sister, where thou?
A sailors wife had chestnuts in her lap,
And munchd, and munchd, and munchd:--
Give me, quoth I:
Aroint thee, witch! the rump-fed ronyon cries.
Her husbands to Aleppo gone, master o the Tiger:
But in a sieve Ill thither sail,
And, like a rat without a tail,
Ill do, Ill do, and Ill do.
Ill give thee a wind.
Thourt kind.
And I another.
I myself have all the other,
And the very ports they blow,
All the quarters that they know
I the shipmans card.
I will drain him dry as hay:
Sleep shall neither night nor day
Hang upon his pent-house lid;
He shall live a man forbid:
Weary sennights nine times nine
Shall he dwindle, peak and pine:
Though his bark cannot be lost,
Yet it shall be tempest-tost.
Look what I have.
Show me, show me.
Here I have a pilots thumb,
Wreckd as homeward he did come.
Drum within
A drum, a drum!
Macbeth doth come.
The weird sisters, hand in hand,
Posters of the sea and land,
Thus do go about, about:
Thrice to thine and thrice to mine
And thrice again, to make up nine.
Peace! the charms wound up.
Enter MACBETH and BANQUO
So foul and fair a day I have not seen.
How far ist calld to Forres? What are these
So witherd and so wild in their attire,
That look not like the inhabitants o the earth,
And yet are ont? Live you? or are you aught
That man may question? You seem to understand me,
By each at once her chappy finger laying
Upon her skinny lips: you should be women,
And yet your beards forbid me to interpret
That you are so.
Speak, if you can: what are you?
All hail, Macbeth! hail to thee, thane of Glamis!
All hail, Macbeth, hail to thee, thane of Cawdor!
All hail, Macbeth, thou shalt be king hereafter!
Good sir, why do you start; and seem to fear
Things that do sound so fair? I the name of truth,
Are ye fantastical, or that indeed
Which outwardly ye show? My noble partner
You greet with present grace and great prediction
Of noble having and of royal hope,
That he seems rapt withal: to me you speak not.
If you can look into the seeds of time,
And say which grain will grow and which will not,
Speak then to me, who neither beg nor fear
Your favours nor your hate.
Hail!
Hail!
Hail!
Lesser than Macbeth, and greater.
Not so happy, yet much happier.
Thou shalt get kings, though thou be none:
So all hail, Macbeth and Banquo!
Banquo and Macbeth, all hail!
Stay, you imperfect speakers, tell me more:
By Sinels death I know I am thane of Glamis;
But how of Cawdor? the thane of Cawdor lives,
A prosperous gentleman; and to be king
Stands not within the prospect of belief,
No more than to be Cawdor. Say from whence
You owe this strange intelligence? or why
Upon this blasted heath you stop our way
With such prophetic greeting? Speak, I charge you.
Witches vanish
The earth hath bubbles, as the water has,
And these are of them. Whither are they vanishd?
Into the air; and what seemd corporal melted
As breath into the wind. Would they had stayd!
Were such things here as we do speak about?
Or have we eaten on the insane root
That takes the reason prisoner?
Your children shall be kings.
You shall be king.
And thane of Cawdor too: went it not so?
To the selfsame tune and words. Whos here?
Enter ROSS and ANGUS
The king hath happily received, Macbeth,
The news of thy success; and when he reads
Thy personal venture in the rebels fight,
His wonders and his praises do contend
Which should be thine or his: silenced with that,
In viewing oer the rest o the selfsame day,
He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks,
Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make,
Strange images of death. As thick as hail
Came post with post; and every one did bear
Thy praises in his kingdoms great defence,
And pourd them down before him.
We are sent
To give thee from our royal master thanks;
Only to herald thee into his sight,
Not pay thee.
And, for an earnest of a greater honour,
He bade me, from him, call thee thane of Cawdor:
In which addition, hail, most worthy thane!
For it is thine.
What, can the devil speak true?
The thane of Cawdor lives: why do you dress me
In borrowd robes?
Who was the thane lives yet;
But under heavy judgment bears that life
Which he deserves to lose. Whether he was combined
