continue in his courses till thou knowest what they
are.
Marry, I thank your worship for it. Thou seest, thou
wicked varlet, now, whats come upon thee: thou art
to continue now, thou varlet; thou art to continue.
Where were you born, friend?
Here in Vienna, sir.
Are you of fourscore pounds a year?
Yes, ant please you, sir.
So. What trade are you of, sir?
Tapster; a poor widows tapster.
Your mistress name?
Mistress Overdone.
Hath she had any more than one husband?
Nine, sir; Overdone by the last.
Nine! Come hither to me, Master Froth. Master
Froth, I would not have you acquainted with
tapsters: they will draw you, Master Froth, and you
will hang them. Get you gone, and let me hear no
more of you.
I thank your worship. For mine own part, I never
come into any room in a tap-house, but I am drawn
in.
Well, no more of it, Master Froth: farewell.
Exit FROTH
Come you hither to me, Master tapster. Whats your
name, Master tapster?
Pompey.
What else?
Bum, sir.
Troth, and your bum is the greatest thing about you;
so that in the beastliest sense you are Pompey the
Great. Pompey, you are partly a bawd, Pompey,
howsoever you colour it in being a tapster, are you
not? come, tell me true: it shall be the better for you.
Truly, sir, I am a poor fellow that would live.
How would you live, Pompey? by being a bawd? What
do you think of the trade, Pompey? is it a lawful trade?
If the law would allow it, sir.
But the law will not allow it, Pompey; nor it shall
not be allowed in Vienna.
Does your worship mean to geld and splay all the
youth of the city?
No, Pompey.
Truly, sir, in my poor opinion, they will tot then.
If your worship will take order for the drabs and
the knaves, you need not to fear the bawds.
There are pretty orders beginning, I can tell you:
it is but heading and hanging.
If you head and hang all that offend that way but
for ten year together, youll be glad to give out a
commission for more heads: if this law hold in
Vienna ten year, Ill rent the fairest house in it
after three-pence a bay: if you live to see this
come to pass, say Pompey told you so.
Thank you, good Pompey; and, in requital of your
prophecy, hark you: I advise you, let me not find
you before me again upon any complaint whatsoever;
no, not for dwelling where you do: if I do, Pompey,
I shall beat you to your tent, and prove a shrewd
Caesar to you; in plain dealing, Pompey, I shall
have you whipt: so, for this time, Pompey, fare you well.
I thank your worship for your good counsel:
Aside
but I shall follow it as the flesh and fortune shall
better determine.
Whip me? No, no; let carman whip his jade:
The valiant heart is not whipt out of his trade.
Exit
Come hither to me, Master Elbow; come hither, Master
constable. How long have you been in this place of constable?
Seven year and a half, sir.
I thought, by your readiness in the office, you had
continued in it some time. You say, seven years together?
And a half, sir.
Alas, it hath been great pains to you. They do you
wrong to put you so oft upon t: are there not men
in your ward sufficient to serve it?
Faith, sir, few of any wit in such matters: as they
are chosen, they are glad to choose me for them; I
do it for some piece of money, and go through with
all.
Look you bring me in the names of some six or seven,
the most sufficient of your parish.
To your worships house, sir?
To my house. Fare you well.
Exit ELBOW
Whats oclock, think you?
Eleven, sir.
I pray you home to dinner with me.
I humbly thank you.
It grieves me for the death of Claudio;
But theres no remedy.
Lord Angelo is severe.
It is but needful:
Mercy is not itself, that oft looks so;
Pardon is still the nurse of second woe:
But yet,--poor Claudio! There is no remedy.
Come, sir.
Exeunt
SCENE II. Another room in the same.
Enter Provost and a Servant
Hes hearing of a cause; he will come straight
Ill tell him of you.
Pray you, do.
Exit Servant
Ill know
His pleasure; may be he will relent. Alas,
He hath but as offended in a dream!
All sects, all ages smack of this vice; and he
To die fort!
Enter ANGELO
Now, whats the matter. Provost?
Is it your will Claudio shall die tomorrow?
Did not I tell thee yea? hadst thou not order?
Why dost thou ask again?
Lest I might be too rash:
Under your good correction, I have seen,
When, after execution, judgment hath
Repented oer his doom.
Go to; let that be mine:
Do you your office, or give up your place,
And you shall well be spared.
I crave your honours pardon.
What shall be done, sir, with the groaning Juliet?
Shes very near her hour.
Dispose of her
To some more fitter place, and that with speed.
Re-enter Servant
Here is the sister of the man condemnd
Desires access to you.
Hath he a sister?
Ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid,
And to be shortly of a sisterhood,
If not already.
Well, let her be admitted.
Exit Servant
See you the fornicatress be removed:
Let have needful, but not lavish, means;
There shall be order fort.
Enter ISABELLA and LUCIO
God save your honour!
Stay a little while.
To ISABELLA
Youre welcome: whats your will?
I am a woeful suitor to your honour,
Please but your honour hear me.
Well; whats your suit?
There is a vice that most I do abhor,
And most desire should meet the blow of justice;
For which I would not plead, but that I must;
For which I must not plead, but that I am
At war twixt will and will not.
Well; the matter?
I have a brother is condemnd to die:
I do beseech you, let it be his fault,
And not my brother.
[Aside]  Heaven give thee moving graces!
Condemn the fault and not the actor of it?
Why, every faults condemnd ere it be done:
Mine were the very cipher of a function,
To fine the faults whose fine stands in record,
And let go by the actor.
O just but severe law!
I had a brother, then. Heaven keep your honour!
[Aside to ISABELLA]  Givet not oer so: to him
again, entreat him;
Kneel down before him, hang upon his gown:
You are too cold; if you should need a pin,
You could not with more tame a tongue desire it:
To him, I say!
Must he needs die?
Maiden, no remedy.
Yes; I do think that you might pardon him,
And neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
I will not dot.
But can you, if you would?
Look, what I will not, that I cannot do.
But might you dot, and do the world no wrong,
If so your heart were touchd with that remorse
A s mine is to him?
Hes sentenced; tis too late.
[Aside to ISABELLA]  You are too cold.
Too late? why, no; I, that do speak a word.
May call it back again. Well, believe this,
No ceremony that to great ones longs,
Not the kings crown, nor the deputed sword,
The marshals truncheon, nor the judges robe,
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does.
If he had been as you and you as he,
You would have slipt like him; but he, like you,
Would not have been so stern.
Pray you, be gone.
I would to heaven I had your potency,
And you were Isabel! should it then be thus?
No; I would tell what twere to be a judge,
And what a prisoner.
[Aside to ISABELLA]
Ay, touch him; theres the vein.
Your brother is a forfeit of the law,
And you but waste your words.
Alas, alas!
Why, all the souls that were were forfeit once;
And He that might the vantage best have took
Found out the remedy. How would you be,
If He, which is the top of judgment, should
But judge you as you are? O, think on that;
And mercy then will breathe within your lips,
Like man new made.
Be you content, fair maid;
It is the law, not I condemn your brother:
Were he my kinsman, brother, or my son,
It should be thus with him: he must die tomorrow.
To-morrow! O, thats sudden! Spare him, spare him!
Hes not prepared for death. Even for our kitchens
We kill the fowl of season: shall we serve heaven
With less respect than we do minister
To our gross selves? Good, good my lord, bethink you;
Who is it that hath died for this offence?
Theres many have committed it.
[Aside to ISABELLA]           Ay, well said.
The law hath not been dead, though it hath slept:
Those many had not dared to do that evil,
If the first that did the edict infringe
Had answerd for his deed: now tis awake
Takes note of what is done; and, like a prophet,
Looks in a glass, that shows what future evils,
Either new, or by remissness new-conceived,
And so in progress to be hatchd and born,
Are now to have no successive degrees,
But, ere they live, to end.
Yet show some pity.
I show it most of all when I show justice;
For then I pity those I do not know,
Which a dismissd offence would after gall;
And do him right that, answering one foul wrong,
Lives not to act another. Be satisfied;
Your brother dies to-morrow; be content.
So you must be the first that gives this sentence,
And he, that suffers. O, it is excellent
To have a giants strength; but it is tyrannous
To use it like a giant.
[Aside to ISABELLA]   Thats well said.
Could great men thunder
As Jove himself does, Jove would neer be quiet,
For every pelting, petty officer
Would use his heaven for thunder;
Nothing but thunder! Merciful Heaven,
Thou rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt
Splitst the unwedgeable and gnarled oak
Than the soft myrtle: but man, proud man,
Drest in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what hes most assured,
His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
As make the angels weep; who, with our spleens,
Would all themselves laugh mortal.
[Aside to ISABELLA]  O, to him, to him, wench! he
will relent;
Hes coming; I perceive t.
[Aside]  Pray heaven she win him!
We cannot weigh our brother with ourself:
Great men may jest with saints; tis wit in them,
But in the less foul profanation.
Thourt i the right, girl; more o, that.
That in the captains but a choleric word,
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
[Aside to ISABELLA]  Art avised o that? more on t.
Why do you put these sayings upon me?
Because authority, though it err like others,
Hath yet a kind of medicine in itself,
That skins the vice o the top. Go to your bosom;
Knock there, and ask your heart what it doth know
Thats like my brothers fault: if it confess
A natural guiltiness such as is his,
Let it not sound a thought upon your tongue
Against my brothers life.
[Aside]                  She speaks, and tis
Such sense, that my sense breeds with it. Fare you well.
Gentle my lord, turn back.
I will bethink me: come again tomorrow.
Hark how Ill bribe you: good my lord, turn back.
How! bribe me?
Ay, with such gifts that heaven shall share with you.
[Aside to ISABELLA]  You had marrd all else.
Not with fond shekels of the tested gold,
Or stones whose rates are either rich or poor
As fancy values them; but with true prayers
That shall be up at heaven and enter there
Ere sun-rise, prayers from preserved souls,
From fasting maids whose minds are dedicate
To nothing temporal.
Well; come to me to-morrow.
[Aside to ISABELLA]  Go to; tis well; away!
Heaven keep your honour safe!
[Aside]Amen:
For I am that way going to temptation,
Where prayers cross.
At what hour to-morrow
Shall I attend your lordship?
At any time fore noon.
Save your honour!
Exeunt ISABELLA, LUCIO, and Provost
From thee, even from thy virtue!
Whats this, whats this? Is this her fault or mine?
The tempter or the tempted, who sins most?
Ha!
Not she: nor doth she tempt: but it is I
That, lying by the violet in the sun,
Do as the carrion does, not as the flower,
Corrupt with virtuous season. Can it be
That modesty may more betray our sense
Than womans lightness? Having waste ground enough,
Shall we desire to raze the sanctuary
And pitch our evils there? O, fie, fie, fie!
What dost thou, or what art thou, Angelo?
Dost thou desire her foully for those things
That make her good? O, let her brother live!
Thieves for their robbery have authority
When judges steal themselves. What, do I love her,
That I desire to hear her speak again,
And feast upon her eyes? What ist I dream on?
O cunning enemy, that, to catch a saint,
With saints dost bait thy hook! Most dangerous
Is that temptation that doth goad us on
To sin in loving virtue: never could the strumpet,
With all her double vigour, art and nature,
Once stir my temper; but this virtuous maid
Subdues me quite. Even till now,
When men were fond, I smiled and wonderd how.
Exit
SCENE III. A room in a prison.
Enter, severally, DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as a friar, and Provost
Hail to you, provost! so I think you are.
I am the provost. Whats your will, good friar?
Bound by my charity and my blest order,
I come to visit the afflicted spirits
Here in the prison. Do me the common right
To let me see them and to make me know
The nature of their crimes, that I may minister
To them accordingly.
I would do more than that, if more were needful.
Enter JULIET
Look, here comes one: a gentlewoman of mine,
Who, falling in the flaws of her own youth,
Hath blisterd her report: she is with child;
And he that got it, sentenced; a young man
More fit to do another such offence
Than die for this.
When must he die?
As I do think, to-morrow.
I have provided for you: stay awhile,
To JULIET
And you shall be conducted.
Repent you, fair one, of the sin you carry?
I do; and bear the shame most patiently.
Ill teach you how you shall arraign your conscience,
And try your penitence, if it be sound,
Or hollowly put on.
Ill gladly learn.
Love you the man that wrongd you?
Yes, as I love the woman that wrongd him.
So then it seems your most offenceful act
Was mutually committed?
Mutually.
Then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
I do confess it, and repent it, father.
Tis meet so, daughter: but lest you do repent,
As that the sin hath brought you to this shame,
Which sorrow is always towards ourselves, not heaven,
Showing we would not spare heaven as we love it,
But as we stand in fear,--
I do repent me, as it is an evil,
And take the shame with joy.
There rest.
Your partner, as I hear, must die to-morrow,
And I am going with instruction to him.
Grace go with you, Benedicite!
Exit
Must die to-morrow! O injurious love,
That respites me a life, whose very comfort
Is still a dying horror!
Tis pity of him.
Exeunt
SCENE IV. A room in ANGELOs house.
Enter ANGELO
When I would pray and think, I think and pray
To several subjects. Heaven hath my empty words;
Whilst my invention, hearing not my tongue,
Anchors on Isabel: Heaven in my mouth,
As if I did but only chew his name;
And in my heart the strong and swelling evil
Of my conception. The state, whereon I studied
Is like a good thing, being often read,
Grown feard and tedious; yea, my gravity,
Wherein--let no man hear me--I take pride,
Could I with boot change for an idle plume,
Which the air beats for vain. O place, O form,
How often dost thou with thy case, thy habit,
Wrench awe from fools and tie the wiser souls
To thy false seeming! Blood, thou art blood:
Lets write good angel on the devils horn:
Tis not the devils crest.
Enter a Servant
How now! whos there?
One Isabel, a sister, desires access to you.
Teach her the way.
Exit Servant
O heavens!
Why does my blood thus muster to my heart,
Making both it unable for itself,
And dispossessing all my other parts
Of necessary fitness?
So play the foolish throngs with one that swoons;
Come all to help him, and so stop the air
By which he should revive: and even so
The general, subject to a well-wishd king,
Quit their own part, and in obsequious fondness
Crowd to his presence, where their untaught love
Must needs appear offence.
Enter ISABELLA
How now, fair maid?
I am come to know your pleasure.
That you might know it, would much better please me
Than to demand what tis. Your brother cannot live.
Even so. Heaven keep your honour!
Yet may he live awhile; and, it may be,
As long as you or I yet he must die.
Under your sentence?
Yea.
When, I beseech you? that in his reprieve,
Longer or shorter, he may be so fitted
That his soul sicken not.
Ha! fie, these filthy vices! It were as good
To pardon him that hath from nature stolen
A man already made, as to remit
Their saucy sweetness that do coin heavens image
In stamps that are forbid: tis all as easy
Falsely to take away a life true made
As to put metal in restrained means
To make a false one.
Tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
Say you so? then I shall pose you quickly.
Which had you rather, that the most just law
Now took your brothers life; or, to redeem him,
Give up your body to such sweet uncleanness
As she that he hath staind?
Sir, believe this,
I had rather give my body than my soul.
I talk not of your soul: our compelld sins
Stand more for number than for accompt.
How say you?
Nay, Ill not warrant that; for I can speak
Against the thing I say. Answer to this:
I, now the voice of the recorded law,
Pronounce a sentence on your brothers life:
Might there not be a charity in sin
To save this brothers life?
Please you to dot,
Ill take it as a peril to my soul,
It is no sin at all, but charity.
Pleased you to dot at peril of your soul,
Were equal poise of sin and charity.
That I do beg his life, if it be sin,
Heaven let me bear it! you granting of my suit,
If that be sin, Ill make it my morn prayer
To have it added to the faults of mine,
And nothing of your answer.
Nay, but hear me.
Your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant,
Or seem so craftily; and thats not good.
Let me be ignorant, and in nothing good,
But graciously to know I am no better.
Thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright
When it doth tax itself; as these black masks
Proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder
Than beauty could, displayd. But mark me;
To be received plain, Ill speak more gross:
Your brother is to die.
So.
And his offence is so, as it appears,
Accountant to the law upon that pain.
True.
Admit no other way to save his life,--
As I subscribe not that, nor any other,
But in the loss of question,--that you, his sister,
Finding yourself desired of such a person,
Whose credit with the judge, or own great place,
Could fetch your brother from the manacles
Of the all-building law; and that there were
No earthly mean to save him, but that either
You must lay down the treasures of your body
To this supposed, or else to let him suffer;
What would you do?
As much for my poor brother as myself:
That is, were I under the terms of death,
The impression of keen whips Ild wear as rubies,
And strip myself to death, as to a bed
That longing have been sick for, ere Ild yield
My body up to shame.
Then must your brother die.
And twere the cheaper way:
Better it were a brother died at once,
Than that a sister, by redeeming him,
Should die for ever.
Were not you then as cruel as the sentence
That you have slanderd so?
Ignomy in ransom and free pardon
Are of two houses: lawful mercy
Is nothing kin to foul redemption.
You seemd of late to make the law a tyrant;
And rather proved the sliding of your brother
A merriment than a vice.
O, pardon me, my lord; it oft falls out,
To have what we would have, we speak not what we mean:
I something do excuse the thing I hate,
For his advantage that I dearly love.
We are all frail.
Else let my brother die,
If not a feodary, but only he
Owe and succeed thy weakness.
Nay, women are frail too.
Ay, as the glasses where they view themselves;
Which are as easy broke as they make forms.
Women! Help Heaven! men their creation mar
In profiting by them. Nay, call us ten times frail;
For we are soft as our complexions are,
And credulous to false prints.
I think it well:
And from this testimony of your own sex,--
Since I suppose we are made to be no stronger
Than faults may shake our frames,--let me be bold;
I do arrest your words. Be that you are,
That is, a woman; if you be more, youre none;
If you be one, as you are well expressd
By all external warrants, show it now,
By putting on the destined livery.
I have no tongue but one: gentle my lord,
Let me entreat you speak the former language.
Plainly conceive, I love you.
My brother did love Juliet,
And you tell me that he shall die for it.
He shall not, Isabel, if you give me love.
I know your virtue hath a licence int,
Which seems a little fouler than it is,
To pluck on others.
Believe me, on mine honour,
My words express my purpose.
Ha! little honour to be much believed,
And most pernicious purpose! Seeming, seeming!
I will proclaim thee, Angelo; look fort:
Sign me a present pardon for my brother,
Or with an outstretchd throat Ill tell the world aloud
What man thou art.
Who will believe thee, Isabel?
My unsoild name, the austereness of my life,
My vouch against you, and my place i the state,
Will so your accusation overweigh,
That you shall stifle in your own report
And smell of calumny. I have begun,
And now I give my sensual race the rein:
Fit thy consent to my sharp appetite;
Lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes,
That banish what they sue for; redeem thy brother
By yielding up thy body to my will;
Or else he must not only die the death,
But thy unkindness shall his death draw out
To lingering sufferance. Answer me to-morrow,
Or, by the affection that now guides me most,
Ill prove a tyrant to him. As for you,
Say what you can, my false oerweighs your true.
Exit
To whom should I complain? Did I tell this,
Who would believe me? O perilous mouths,
That bear in them one and the self-same tongue,
Either of condemnation or approof;
Bidding the law make courtsy to their will:
Hooking both right and wrong to the appetite,
To follow as it draws! Ill to my brother:
Though he hath fallen by prompture of the blood,
Yet hath he in him such a mind of honour.
That, had he twenty heads to tender down
On twenty bloody blocks, held yield them up,
Before his sister should her body stoop
To such abhorrd pollution.
Then, Isabel, live chaste, and, brother, die:
More than our brother is our chastity.
Ill tell him yet of Angelos request,
And fit his mind to death, for his souls rest.
Exit
ACT III
SCENE I. A room in the prison.
Enter DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as before, CLAUDIO, and Provost
So then you hope of pardon from Lord Angelo?
The miserable have no other medicine
But only hope:
Ive hope to live, and am prepared to die.
Be absolute for death; either death or life
Shall thereby be the sweeter. Reason thus with life:
If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing
That none but fools would keep: a breath thou art,
Servile to all the skyey influences,
That dost this habitation, where thou keepst,
Hourly afflict: merely, thou art deaths fool;
For him thou labourst by thy flight to shun
And yet runnst toward him still. Thou art not noble;
For all the accommodations that thou bearst
Are nursed by baseness. Thourt by no means valiant;
For thou dost fear the soft and tender fork
Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep,
And that thou oft provokest; yet grossly fearst
Thy death, which is no more. Thou art not thyself;
For thou existst on many a thousand grains
That issue out of dust. Happy thou art not;
For what thou hast not, still thou strivest to get,
And what thou hast, forgetst. Thou art not certain;
For thy complexion shifts to strange effects,
After the moon. If thou art rich, thourt poor;
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
Thou bears thy heavy riches but a journey,
And death unloads thee. Friend hast thou none;
For thine own bowels, which do call thee sire,
The mere effusion of thy proper loins,
Do curse the gout, serpigo, and the rheum,
For ending thee no sooner. Thou hast nor youth nor age,
But, as it were, an after-dinners sleep,
Dreaming on both; for all thy blessed youth
Becomes as aged, and doth beg the alms
Of palsied eld; and when thou art old and rich,
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
To make thy riches pleasant. Whats yet in this
That bears the name of life? Yet in this life
Lie hid moe thousand deaths: yet death we fear,
That makes these odds all even.
I humbly thank you.
To sue to live, I find I seek to die;
And, seeking death, find life: let it come on.
[Within]  What, ho! Peace here; grace and good company!
Whos there? come in: the wish deserves a welcome.
Dear sir, ere long Ill visit you again.
Most holy sir, I thank you.
Enter ISABELLA
My business is a word or two with Claudio.
And very welcome. Look, signior, heres your sister.
Provost, a word with you.
As many as you please.
Bring me to hear them speak, where I may be concealed.
Exeunt DUKE VINCENTIO and Provost
Now, sister, whats the comfort?
Why,
As all comforts are; most good, most good indeed.
Lord Angelo, having affairs to heaven,
Intends you for his swift ambassador,
Where you shall be an everlasting leiger:
Therefore your best appointment make with speed;
To-morrow you set on.
Is there no remedy?
None, but such remedy as, to save a head,
To cleave a heart in twain.
But is there any?
Yes, brother, you may live:
There is a devilish mercy in the judge,
If youll implore it, that will free your life,
But fetter you till death.
Perpetual durance?
Ay, just; perpetual durance, a restraint,
Though all the worlds vastidity you had,
To a determined scope.
But in what nature?
In such a one as, you consenting tot,
Would bark your honour from that trunk you bear,
And leave you naked.
Let me know the point.
O, I do fear thee, Claudio; and I quake,
Lest thou a feverous life shouldst entertain,
And six or seven winters more respect
Than a perpetual honour. Darest thou die?
The sense of death is most in apprehension;
And the poor beetle, that we tread upon,
In corporal sufferance finds a pang as great
As when a giant dies.
Why give you me this shame?
Think you I can a resolution fetch
From flowery tenderness? If I must die,
I will encounter darkness as a bride,
And hug it in mine arms.
There spake my brother; there my fathers grave
Did utter forth a voice. Yes, thou must die:
Thou art too noble to conserve a life
In base appliances. This outward-sainted deputy,
Whose settled visage and deliberate word
Nips youth i the head and follies doth emmew
As falcon doth the fowl, is yet a devil
His filth within being cast, he would appear
A pond as deep as hell.
The prenzie Angelo!
O, tis the cunning livery of hell,
The damnedst body to invest and cover
In prenzie guards! Dost thou think, Claudio?
If I would yield him my virginity,
Thou mightst be freed.
O heavens! it cannot be.
Yes, he would givet thee, from this rank offence,
So to offend him still. This nights the time
That I should do what I abhor to name,
Or else thou diest to-morrow.
Thou shalt not dot.
O, were it but my life,
Ild throw it down for your deliverance
As frankly as a pin.
Thanks, dear Isabel.
Be ready, Claudio, for your death tomorrow.
Yes. Has he affections in him,
That thus can make him bite the law by the nose,
When he would force it? Sure, it is no sin,
Or of the deadly seven, it is the least.
Which is the least?
If it were damnable, he being so wise,
Why would he for the momentary trick
Be perdurably fined? O Isabel!
What says my brother?
Death is a fearful thing.
And shamed life a hateful.
Ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
To lie in cold obstruction and to rot;
This sensible warm motion to become
A kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
To bathe in fiery floods, or to reside
In thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice;
To be imprisond in the viewless winds,
And blown with restless violence round about
The pendent world; or to be worse than worst
Of those that lawless and incertain thought
Imagine howling: tis too horrible!
The weariest and most loathed worldly life
That age, ache, penury and imprisonment
Can lay on nature is a paradise
To what we fear of death.
Alas, alas!
Sweet sister, let me live:
What sin you do to save a brothers life,
Nature dispenses with the deed so far
That it becomes a virtue.
O you beast!
O faithless coward! O dishonest wretch!
Wilt thou be made a man out of my vice?
Ist not a kind of incest, to take life
From thine own sisters shame? What should I think?
Heaven shield my mother playd my father fair!
For such a warped slip of wilderness
Neer issued from his blood. Take my defiance!
Die, perish! Might but my bending down
Reprieve thee from thy fate, it should proceed:
Ill pray a thousand prayers for thy death,
No word to save thee.
Nay, hear me, Isabel.
O, fie, fie, fie!
Thy sins not accidental, but a trade.
Mercy to thee would prove itself a bawd:
Tis best thou diest quickly.
O hear me, Isabella!
Re-enter DUKE VINCENTIO
Vouchsafe a word, young sister, but one word.
What is your will?
Might you dispense with your leisure, I would by and
by have some speech with you: the satisfaction I
would require is likewise your own benefit.
I have no superfluous leisure; my stay must be
stolen out of other affairs; but I will attend you awhile.
Walks apart
Son, I have overheard what hath passed between you
and your sister. Angelo had never the purpose to
corrupt her; only he hath made an essay of her
virtue to practise his judgment with the disposition
of natures: she, having the truth of honour in her,
hath made him that gracious denial which he is most
glad to receive. I am confessor to Angelo, and I
know this to be true; therefore prepare yourself to
death: do not satisfy your resolution with hopes
that are fallible: tomorrow you must die; go to
your knees and make ready.
Let me ask my sister pardon. I am so out of love
with life that I will sue to be rid of it.
Hold you there: farewell.
Exit CLAUDIO
Provost, a word with you!
Re-enter Provost
Whats your will, father
That now you are come, you will be gone. Leave me
awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my
habit no loss shall touch her by my company.
In good time.
Exit Provost. ISABELLA comes forward
The hand that hath made you fair hath made you good:
the goodness that is cheap in beauty makes beauty
brief in goodness; but grace, being the soul of
your complexion, shall keep the body of it ever
fair. The assault that Angelo hath made to you,
fortune hath conveyed to my understanding; and, but
that frailty hath examples for his falling, I should
wonder at Angelo. How will you do to content this
substitute, and to save your brother?
I am now going to resolve him: I had rather my
brother die by the law than my son should be
unlawfully born. But, O, how much is the good duke
deceived in Angelo! If ever he return and I can
speak to him, I will open my lips in vain, or
discover his government.
That shall not be much amiss: Yet, as the matter
now stands, he will avoid your accusation; he made
trial of you only. Therefore fasten your ear on my
advisings: to the love I have in doing good a
remedy presents itself. I do make myself believe
that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged
lady a merited benefit; redeem your brother from
the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious
person; and much please the absent duke, if
peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of
this business.
Let me hear you speak farther. I have spirit to do
anything that appears not foul in the truth of my spirit.
Virtue is bold, and goodness never fearful. Have
you not heard speak of Mariana, the sister of
Frederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea?
I have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.
She should this Angelo have married; was affianced
to her by oath, and the nuptial appointed: between
which time of the contract and limit of the
solemnity, her brother Frederick was wrecked at sea,
having in that perished vessel the dowry of his
sister. But mark how heavily this befell to the
poor gentlewoman: there she lost a noble and
renowned brother, in his love toward her ever most
kind and natural; with him, the portion and sinew of
her fortune, her marriage-dowry; with both, her
combinate husband, this well-seeming Angelo.
Can this be so? did Angelo so leave her?
Left her in her tears, and dried not one of them
with his comfort; swallowed his vows whole,
pretending in her discoveries of dishonour: in few,
bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yet
wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears,
is washed with them, but relents not.
What a merit were it in death to take this poor maid
from the world! What corruption in this life, that
it will let this man live! But how out of this can she avail?
It is a rupture that you may easily heal: and the
cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps
you from dishonour in doing it.
Show me how, good father.
This forenamed maid hath yet in her the continuance
of her first affection: his unjust unkindness, that
in all reason should have quenched her love, hath,
like an impediment in the current, made it more
violent and unruly. Go you to Angelo; answer his
requiring with a plausible obedience; agree with
his demands to the point; only refer yourself to
this advantage, first, that your stay with him may
not be long; that the time may have all shadow and
silence in it; and the place answer to convenience.
This being granted in course,--and now follows
all,--we shall advise this wronged maid to stead up
your appointment, go in your place; if the encounter
acknowledge itself hereafter, it may compel him to
her recompense: and here, by this, is your brother
saved, your honour untainted, the poor Mariana
advantaged, and the corrupt deputy scaled. The maid
will I frame and make fit for his attempt. If you
think well to carry this as you may, the doubleness
of the benefit defends the deceit from reproof.
What think you of it?
The image of it gives me content already; and I
trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
It lies much in your holding up. Haste you speedily
to Angelo: if for this night he entreat you to his
bed, give him promise of satisfaction. I will
presently to Saint Lukes: there, at the moated
grange, resides this dejected Mariana. At that
place call upon me; and dispatch with Angelo, that
it may be quickly.
I thank you for this comfort. Fare you well, good father.
Exeunt severally
SCENE II. The street before the prison.
Enter, on one side, DUKE VINCENTIO disguised as before; on the other, ELBOW, and Officers with POMPEY
Nay, if there be no remedy for it, but that you will
needs buy and sell men and women like beasts, we
shall have all the world drink brown and white bastard.
O heavens! what stuff is here
Twas never merry world since, of two usuries, the
merriest was put down, and the worser allowed by
order of law a furred gown to keep him warm; and
furred with fox and lamb-skins too, to signify, that
craft, being richer than innocency, stands for the facing.
Come your way, sir. Bless you, good father friar.
And you, good brother father. What offence hath
this man made you, sir?
Marry, sir, he hath offended the law: and, sir, we
take him to be a thief too, sir; for we have found
upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which we have
sent to the deputy.
Fie, sirrah! a bawd, a wicked bawd!
The evil that thou causest to be done,
That is thy means to live. Do thou but think
What tis to cram a maw or clothe a back
From such a filthy vice: say to thyself,
From their abominable and beastly touches
I drink, I eat, array myself, and live.
Canst thou believe thy living is a life,
So stinkingly depending? Go mend, go mend.
Indeed, it does stink in some sort, sir; but yet,
sir, I would prove--
Nay, if the devil have given thee proofs for sin,
Thou wilt prove his. Take him to prison, officer:
Correction and instruction must both work
Ere this rude beast will profit.
He must before the deputy, sir; he has given him
warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if
he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were
as good go a mile on his errand.
That we were all, as some would seem to be,
From our faults, as faults from seeming, free!
His neck will come to your waist,--a cord, sir.
I spy comfort; I cry bail. Heres a gentleman and a
friend of mine.
Enter LUCIO
How now, noble Pompey! What, at the wheels of
Caesar? art thou led in triumph? What, is there
none of Pygmalions images, newly made woman, to be
had now, for putting the hand in the pocket and
extracting it clutchd? What reply, ha? What
sayest thou to this tune, matter and method? Ist
not drowned i the last rain, ha? What sayest
thou, Trot? Is the world as it was, man? Which is
the way? Is it sad, and few words? or how? The
trick of it?
Still thus, and thus; still worse!
How doth my dear morsel, thy mistress? Procures she
still, ha?
Troth, sir, she hath eaten up all her beef, and she
is herself in the tub.
Why, tis good; it is the right of it; it must be
so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered bawd:
an unshunned consequence; it must be so. Art going
to prison, Pompey?
Yes, faith, sir.
Why, tis not amiss, Pompey. Farewell: go, say I
sent thee thither. For debt, Pompey? or how?
For being a bawd, for being a bawd.
Well, then, imprison him: if imprisonment be the
due of a bawd, why, tis his right: bawd is he
doubtless, and of antiquity too; bawd-born.
Farewell, good Pompey. Commend me to the prison,
Pompey: you will turn good husband now, Pompey; you
will keep the house.
I hope, sir, your good worship will be my bail.
No, indeed, will I not, Pompey; it is not the wear.
I will pray, Pompey, to increase your bondage: If
you take it not patiently, why, your mettle is the
more. Adieu, trusty Pompey. Bless you, friar.
And you.
Does Bridget paint still, Pompey, ha?
Come your ways, sir; come.
You will not bail me, then, sir?
Then, Pompey, nor now. What news abroad, friar?
what news?
Come your ways, sir; come.
Go to kennel, Pompey; go.
Exeunt ELBOW, POMPEY and Officers
What news, friar, of the duke?
I know none. Can you tell me of any?
Some say he is with the Emperor of Russia; other
some, he is in Rome: but where is he, think you?
I know not where; but wheresoever, I wish him well.
It was a mad fantastical trick of him to steal from
the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born
to. Lord Angelo dukes it well in his absence; he
puts transgression to t.
He does well in t.
A little more lenity to lechery would do no harm in
him: something too crabbed that way, friar.
It is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
Yes, in good sooth, the vice is of a great kindred;
it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp
it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put
down. They say this Angelo was not made by man and
woman after this downright way of creation: is it
true, think you?
How should he be made, then?
Some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he
was begot between two stock-fishes. But it is
certain that when he makes water his urine is
congealed ice; that I know to be true: and he is a
motion generative; thats infallible.
You are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
Why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the
rebellion of a codpiece to take away the life of a
man! Would the duke that is absent have done this?
Ere he would have hanged a man for the getting a
hundred bastards, he would have paid for the nursing
